# Popular Frameworks for Building CLIs

This chapter will explore the most popular frameworks available to assist you with rapidly developing modern CLI applications. After seeing all the code that it takes to manually create a command and structure a CLI application, you’ll see how Cobra allows developers to quickly generate all the scaffolding needed for a CLI application and add new commands easily.

Viper easily integrates with Cobra to configure your applications locally or remotely using multiple formats. The options are extensive, and developers can choose what they feel works best for their project and what they are comfortable with. This chapter will give you an in-depth look at Cobra and Viper through the following topics:

-   Cobra – a library for building modern CLI applications
-   Viper – easy configuration for CLIs
-   Basic calculator CLI using Cobra and Viper

Bookmark

# Technical requirements

To easily follow along with the code in this chapter, you will need to do the following:

-   Install the Cobra CLI: [https://github.com/spf13/cobra-cli](https://github.com/spf13/cobra-cli)[](https://github.com/spf13/cobra-cli%0A)
-   Get the Cobra package: [https://github.com/spf13/cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra)[](https://github.com/spf13/cobra%0A)
-   Get the Viper package: [https://github.com/spf13/viper](https://github.com/spf13/viper)
-   Download the following code: [https://github.com/ImagineDevOps/Building-Modern-CLI-Applications-in-Go/tree/main/Chapter04](https://github.com/ImagineDevOps/Building-Modern-CLI-Applications-in-Go/tree/main/Chapter04)

Bookmark

# Cobra – a library for building modern CLI applications

Cobra is a Go library for building powerful and modern CLI applications. It makes defining both simple and complex nested commands easy. The extensive field list for the Cobra `Command` object allows you to access the complete self-documenting help and man pages. Cobra also offers some fun additional benefits, including intelligent shell autocomplete, CLI scaffolding, code generation, and integration with the Viper configuration solution.

The Cobra library provides a much more powerful command structure than one written from scratch. As mentioned, there are many advantages to using the Cobra CLI, so we will dive into a few examples to exhibit its power. Starting a CLI with Cobra from scratch only requires three steps. First, make sure that `cobra-cli` is properly installed. Create a new folder for your project and follow these steps in sequence to set up your new CLI:

1.  Change directories into your project folder, `audiofile-cli`:

`cd audiofile-cli`

1.  Create a module and initialize your current directory:

`go mod init <``module path>`

1.  Initialize your Cobra CLI:

`cobra-cli init`

After running just three commands, `ls` shows that the folder structure is already created, and commands are ready to be added. Running the `main.go` file returns the default long description, but once commands are added, the audiofile CLI usage will be displayed with help and examples instead.

If you run `cobra-cli` on its own to see the options available, you’ll see there are only four commands, `add`, `completion`, `help`, and `init`. Since we’ve already used `init` to initialize our project, next, we’ll use `add` to create the template code for a new command.

## Creating subcommands

The fastest way to add a new command from the Cobra CLI is to run the `cobra-cli` command, `add`. To get more details on this command, we run `cobra-cli` `add` `–help`, which shows us the syntax for running the `add` command.

To try to create the example `upload` command from the previous chapter, we would run the following:

```markup
cobra-cli add upload
```

Let’s quickly try calling the code that was generated for the `upload` command:

```markup
  audiofile-cli go run main.go upload
upload called
```

By default, the `upload called` output is returned. Now, let’s take a look at the generated code. Within the same file for the command is an `init` function that adds this command to the `root` or `entry` command.

Let’s clean this file up and fill in some details for our `upload` command:

```markup
package cmd
import (
    "github.com/spf13/cobra"
)
// uploadCmd represents the upload command
var uploadCmd = &cobra.Command{
    Use:   "upload [audio|video] [-f|--filename]
      <filename>",
    Short: "upload an audio or video file",
    Long: `This command allows you to upload either an
      audio or video file for metadata extraction.
    To pass in a filename, use the -f or --filename flag
     followed by the path of the file.
    Examples:
    ./audiofile-cli upload audio -f audio/beatdoctor.mp3
    ./audiofile-cli upload video --filename video/
      musicvideo.mp4`,
}
func init() {
    rootCmd.AddCommand(uploadCmd)
}
```

Now, let’s create these two new subcommands for the `upload` command to specify either audio or video:

```markup
  cobra-cli add audio
audio created at /Users/marian/go/src/github.com/
  marianina8/audiofile-cli
  cobra-cli add video
video created at /Users/marian/go/src/github.com/
  marianina8/audiofile-cli
```

We add `audioCmd` and `videoCmd` as subcommands to `uploadCmd`. The `audio` command, which contains only the generated code, needs to be modified in order to be recognized as a subcommand. Also, we need to define the filename flag for the `audio` subcommand. The `init` function of the `audio` command will look as follows:

```markup
func init() {
    audioCmd.Flags().StringP("filename", "f", "", "audio
      file")
    uploadCmd.AddCommand(audioCmd)
}
```

Parsing the filename flag happens within the `Run` function. However, we want to return an error if the filename flag is missing, so we change the function on `audioCmd` to return an error and use the `RunE` method instead:

```markup
    RunE: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) error {
        filename, err := cmd.Flags().GetString("filename")
        if err != nil {
            fmt.Printf("error retrieving filename: %s\n",
            err.Error())
            return err
        }
        if filename == "" {
            return errors.New("missing filename")
        }
        fmt.Println("uploading audio file, ", filename)
        return nil
    },
```

Let’s try this code out first to see whether we get an error when we don’t pass in the subcommand, and when we run the proper example command:

```markup
cobra-cli add upload
```

We now get an error message relating to the usage of the `upload` command:

```markup
  go run main.go upload
This command allows you to upload either an audio or video
  file for metadata extraction.
    To pass in a filename, use the -f or --filename flag
  followed by the path of the file.
     Examples:
     ./audiofile-cli upload audio -f audio/beatdoctor.mp3
     ./audiofile-cli upload video --filename video/musicvideo.mp4
Usage:
  audiofile-cli upload [command]
Available Commands:
  audio       sets audio as the upload type
  video       sets video as the upload type
```

Let’s correctly run the command with either the shorthand or longhand flag name:

```markup
cobra-cli add upload audio [-f|--filename]
  audio/beatdoctor.mp3
```

The command then returns the expected output:

```markup
  go run main.go upload audio -f audio/beatdoctor.mp3
uploading audio file,audio/beatdoctor.mp3
```

We’ve created a subcommand, `audio`, of the `upload` command. Now the implementations for video and audio are called using separate subcommands.

## Global, local, and required flags

Cobra allows users to define different types of flags: global and local flags. Let’s quickly define each type:

-   Global: A global flag is available to the command it is assigned to and every subcommand of that command
-   Local: A local flag is only available to the command it is assigned to

Notice that both the video and `audio` subcommands require a flag to parse the `filename` string. It would probably be easier to set this flag as a global flag on `uploadCmd`. Let’s remove the flag definition from the `init` function of `audioCmd`:

```markup
func init() {
    uploadCmd.AddCommand(audioCmd)
}
```

Instead, let’s add it as a global command on `uploadCmd` so that it can also be used by `videoCmd`. The `init` function of `uploadCmd` will now look like this:

```markup
var (
    Filename = ""
)
func init() {
    uploadCmd.PersistentFlags().StringVarP(&Filename,
      "filename", "f", "", "file to upload")
    rootCmd.AddCommand(uploadCmd)
}
```

This `PersistentFlags()` method sets a flag as global and persistent for all subcommands. Running the command to `upload` an audio file still works as expected:

```markup
  go run main.go upload audio -f audio/beatdoctor.mp3
uploading audio file,  audio/beatdoctor.mp3
```

In the `audio` subcommand implementation, we check to see whether the filename is set. This is an unnecessary step if we make the file required. Let’s change `init` to do that:

```markup
func init() {
    uploadCmd.PersistentFlags().StringVarP(&Filename,
      "filename", "f", "", "file to upload")
    uploadCmd.MarkPersistentFlagRequired("filename")
    rootCmd.AddCommand(uploadCmd)
}
```

For local flags, the command would be `MarkFlagRequired("filename")`. Now let’s try to run the command without passing in the filename flag:

```markup
  go run main.go upload audio
Error: required flag(s) "filename" not set
Usage:
  audiofile-cli upload audio [flags]
Flags:
  -h, --help   help for audio
Global Flags:
  -f, --filename string   file to upload
exit status 1
```

An error is thrown by Cobra without having to manually check whether the filename flag is parsed. Because the audio and video commands are subcommands to the `upload` command, they require the newly defined, persistent filename flag. As expected, an error is thrown to remind the user that the filename flag is not set. Another way that your CLI application can help guide users is when they incorrectly type in a command.

## Intelligent suggestions

By default, Cobra will provide command suggestions if the user has mistyped a command. An example is when the command is entered:

```markup
  go run main.go uload audio
Cobra will automatically respond with some intelligent
  suggestions:
Error: unknown command "uload" for "audiofile-cli"
Did you mean this?
     upload
Run 'audiofile-cli --help' for usage.
exit status 1
```

To disable intelligent suggestions, just add the `rootCmd.DisableSuggestions = true` line to the `init` function for the root command. To change the Levenshtein distance for suggestions, modify the value of `SuggestionsMinimumDistance` on the command. You can also use the `SuggestFor` attribute on a command to explicitly state suggestions, which makes sense for commands that are logical substitutes but aren’t close in terms of the Levenshtein distance. Another way to guide first-time users of your CLI is to provide help and man pages for your application. The Cobra framework provides an easy way to automatically generate not only help but also man pages.

## Automatically generated help and man pages

As we’ve already seen, entering a wrong command, or adding the `-h` or `–help` flag to the command, will cause the CLI to return the help documentation, automatically generated from the details set within the `cobra.Command` structure. Also, man pages may be generated with the addition of the following import: `"github.com/spf13/cobra/doc"`.

Note

Specifics on how to generate man page documentation will be detailed in [_Chapter 9_](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781804611654/2B18883_09.xhtml#_idTextAnchor190), _The Empathic Side of Development_, which includes how to write proper help and documentation.

## Powering your CLI

As you can see, there are many benefits to using the Cobra library to power your CLI, giving many features by default. The library also comes with its own CLI for generating scaffolding for a new application and for adding commands, which, with all the options available in the `cobra.Command` struct, gives you everything needed to build a robust and highly customizable CLI.

Compared to writing your CLI from scratch without a framework, you can save hours of your time with many of the built-in advantages: command scaffolding, excellent command, argument, and flag parsing, intelligent suggestions, and autogenerated help text and man pages. You can also pair your Cobra CLI with Viper to configure your application for additional benefits.

Bookmark

# Viper – easy configuration for CLIs

Steve Francia, author of Cobra, also created a configuration tool, Viper, to easily integrate with Cobra. For a simple application that you’re running locally on your machine, you may not initially need a configuration tool. However, if your application may run within different environments that require different integrations, API keys, or general customizations that are better in a config file versus hardcoded, Viper will help ease the process of configuring your app.

## Configuration types

There are many ways Viper allows you to set your application’s configuration:

-   Reading from configuration files
-   With environment variables
-   With remote config systems
-   With command-line flags
-   With a buffer

The configuration formats accepted from these configuration types include JSON, TOML, YAML, HCL, INI, envfile, and Java properties formats. To get a better understanding, let’s go over an example of each configuration type.

### Config file

Suppose we have different URL and port values to connect to depending on different environments. We could set up a YAML configuration file, `config.yml`, that looks like this and is stored within the main folder of our application:

```markup
environments:
  test:
    url: 89.45.23.123
    port: 1234
  prod:
    url: 123.23.45.89
    port: 5678
loglevel: 1
keys:
  assemblyai: xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
```

Use the code to read in the configuration and test, printing out the prod environment’s URL:

```markup
viper.SetConfigName("config) // config filename, omit
  extension
viper.AddConfigPath(".")      // optional locations for
  searching for config files
err = viper.ReadInConfig()    // using the previous
  settings above, attempt to find and read in the
    configuration
if err != nil { // Handle errors
    panic(fmt.Errorf("err: %w \n", err))
}
fmt.Println("prod environment url:",
  viper.Get("environments.prod.url"))
```

Running the code confirms that `Println` will return `environments.prod.url` as `123.23.45.89`.

### Environment variable

Configuration may also be set via environment variables; just note that Viper’s recognition of environment variables is case sensitive. There are a few methods that can be used when working with environment variables.

`SetEnvPrefix` tells Viper that the environment variables used with the `BindEnv` and `AutomaticEnv` methods will be prefixed with a specific unique value. For example, say the test URL is set within an environment variable:

```markup
viper.SetEnvPrefix("AUDIOFILE")
viper.BindEnv("TEST_URL")
os.Setenv("AUDIOFILE_TEST_URL", "89.45.23.123") //sets the
  environment variable
fmt.Println("test environment url from environment
  variable:", viper.Get("TEST_URL"))
```

As mentioned, the prefix, `AUDIOFILE`, affixes to the start of each environment variable passed into the `BindEnv` or `Get` method. When the preceding code is run, the value printed for the test environment URL from the `AUDIOFILE_TEST_URL` environment variable is `89.45.23.123`, as expected.

### Command-line flags

Viper supports configuration via several different types of flags:

-   Flags: Flags defined using the standard Go library flag package
-   Pflags: Flags defined using Cobra/Viper’s `pflag` definition
-   Flag interfaces: Custom structures that satisfy a flag interface required by Viper

Let’s check out each of these in detail.

#### Flags

Building on top of the standard Go flag package. The Viper `flags` package extends the functionality of the standard flag package, providing additional features such as environment variable support and the ability to set default values for flags. With Viper flags, you can define flags for string, Boolean, integer, and floating-point types, as well as for arrays of these types.

Some example code may look as follows:

```markup
viper.SetDefault("host", "localhost")
viper.SetDefault("port", 1234)
viper.BindEnv("host", "AUDIOFILE_HOST")
viper.BindEnv("port", "AUDIOFILE_PORT")
```

In the preceding example, we set default values for the “`host`” and “`port`” flags and then bind them to environment variables using `viper.BindEnv`. After setting the environment variables, we can access the values of the flags using `viper.GetString("host")` and `viper.GetInt("port")`.

#### Pflags

`pflag` is the flag package specific to Cobra and Viper. The values can be parsed and bound. `viper.BindPFFlag`, for individual flags, and `viper.BindPFFlags`, for flag sets, are used to bind the value of the flag when it is accessed rather than defined.

Once the flags are parsed and bound, the values can be accessed anywhere in the code using Viper’s `Get` methods. For retrieving the port, we’d use the following code:

```markup
port := viper.GetInt("port")
```

Within the `init` function, you can define a command-line flag set and bind the values once they are accessed. Take the following example:

```markup
pflag.CommandLine.AddGoFlagSet(flag.CommandLine)
pflag.Int("port", 1234, "port")
pflag.String("url", "12.34.567.123", "url")
plag.Parse()
viper.BindPFlags(pflag.CommandLine)
```

#### Flag interfaces

Viper also allows custom flags that satisfy the following Go interfaces: `FlagValue` and `FlagValueSet`.

The `FlagValue` interface is as follows:

```markup
type FlagValue interface {
    HasChanged() bool
    Name() string
    ValueString() string
    ValueType() string
}
```

The second interface that Viper accepts is `FlagValueSet`:

```markup
type FlagValueSet interface {
    VisitAll(fn func(FlagValue))
}
```

An example of code that satisfies this interface is as follows:

```markup
type customFlagSet struct {
    flags []customFlag
}
func (set customFlagSet) VisitAll(fn func(FlagValue)) {
    for i, flag := range set.flags {
fmt.Printf("%d: %v\n", i, flag)
        fn(flag)
    }
}
```

### Buffer

Finally, Viper allows users to configure their applications with a buffer. Using the same value that exists within the configuration file in the first example, we pass the YAML data in as a raw string into a byte slice:

```markup
var config = []byte(`
    environments:
    test:
      url: 89.45.23.123
      port: 1234
    prod:
      url: 123.23.45.89
      port: 5678
  loglevel: 1
  keys:
    assemblyai: ad915a59802309238234892390482304
`)
viper.SetConfigType("yaml")
viper.ReadConfig(bytes.NewBuffer(config))
viper.Get("environments.test.url") // 89.45.23.123
```

Now that you know the different types or ways of configuring your command-line application – from a file, environment variable, flags, or buffer – let’s see how to watch for live changes on these configuration types.

## Watching for live config changes

Both remote and local configurations can be watched. After making sure all configuration paths are added, call the `WatchConfig` method to watch for any live changes and take action by implementing a function to pass into the `OnConfigChange` method:

```markup
viper.OnConfigChange(func(event fsnotify.Event) {
    fmt.Println("Config modified:", event)
})
viper.WatchConfig()
```

To watch for changes on a remote config, first, read in the remote config using `ReadRemoteConfig()`, and on the instance of the Viper configuration, call the `WatchRemoteConfig()` method. Some sample code is as follows:

```markup
var remoteConfig = viper.New()
remoteConfig.AddRemoteProvider("consul",
  "http://127.0.0.1:2380", "/config/audiofile-cli.json")
remoteConfig.SetConfigType("json")
err := remoteConfig.ReadRemoteConfig()
if err != nil {
    return err
}
remoteConfig.Unmarshal(&remote_conf)
```

The following is an example of a goroutine that will continuously watch for remote configuration changes:

```markup
go func(){
    for {
        time.Sleep(time.Second * 1)
        _:= remoteConfig.WatchRemoteConfig()
        remoteConfig.Unmarshal(&remote_conf)
    }
}()
```

I think that there’s much to benefit from utilizing a configuration library rather than starting from scratch, which again can save you hours and expedite your development process. Besides the different ways you can configure your application, you can also provide remote configuration and watch for any changes live. This further creates a more robust application.

Bookmark

# Basic calculator CLI using Cobra and Viper

Let us pull some of the pieces together and create a separate and simple CLI using the Cobra CLI framework and Viper for configuration. A simple idea that we can easily implement is a basic calculator that can add, subtract, multiply, and divide values. The code for this demo exists within the `Chapter-4-Demo` repository for you to follow along.

## The Cobra CLI commands

The commands are created with the following `cobra-cli` command calls:

```markup
cobra-cli add add
cobra-cli add subtract
cobra-cli add multiply
cobra-cli add divide
```

Calling these commands successfully generates the code for each command, ready for us to fill in the details. Let us show each command and how they each are similar and different.

### The add command

The `add` command, `addCmd`, is defined as a pointer to the `cobra.Command` type. Here, we set the fields for the command:

```markup
// addCmd represents the add command
var addCmd = &cobra.Command{
    Use: "add number",
    Short: "Add value",
    Run: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) {
        if len(args) > 1 {
            fmt.Println("only accepts a single argument")
            return
        }
        if len(args) == 0 {
            fmt.Println("command requires input value")
            return
        }
        floatVal, err := strconv.ParseFloat(args[0], 64)
        if err != nil {
            fmt.Printf("unable to parse input[%s]: %v",
              args[0], err)
            return
        }
        value = storage.GetValue()
        value += floatVal
        storage.SetValue(value)
        fmt.Printf("%f\n", value)
    },
}
```

Let us take a quick walk through the `Run` field, which is a first-class function. Before doing any calculations, we check `args`. The command only takes one numerical field; any more or less will print a usage statement and return the following:

```markup
if len(args) > 1 {
    fmt.Println("only accepts a single argument")
    return
}
if len(args) == 0 {
    fmt.Println("command requires input value")
    return
}
```

We take the first and only argument, return it, set it within `args[0]`, and parse it to a flat variable using the following code. If the conversion to a `float64` value fails, then the command prints out a message about being unable to parse the input and then returns:

```markup
floatVal, err := strconv.ParseFloat(args[0], 64)
if err != nil {
    fmt.Printf("unable to parse input[%s]: %v", args[0],
      err)
    return
}
```

If the conversion is successful, and no errors are returned from the string conversion, then we have a value set for `floatVal`. In our basic calculator CLI, we are storing the value in a file, which is the simplest way to store it for this example. The `storage` package and how Viper is used in configuration will be discussed after the commands. At an elevated level, we get the current value from storage and apply the operation to `floatVal`, and then save it back into storage:

```markup
value = storage.GetValue()
value += floatVal
storage.SetValue(value)
```

Last but not least, the value is printed back to the user:

```markup
fmt.Printf("%f\n", value)
```

That concludes our look at the `Run` function of the `add` command. The `Use` field describes the usage, and the `Short` field gives a brief description of the command. This concludes the walk-through of the add command. The subtract, multiply, and divide `Run` functions on their respective commands are remarkably similar, so I will just point out some differences to note.

### The subtract command

The same code is used for `subtractCmd`’s `Run` function with just a small exception. Instead of adding the value to `floatVal`, we subtract it with the following line:

```markup
value -= floatVal
```

### The multiply command

The same code is used for `multiplyCmd`’s `Run` function, except we multiply it with the following line:

```markup
value *= floatVal
```

### The divide command

Finally, the same code is used for `divideCmd`’s `Run` function, except for dividing it by `floatVal`:

```markup
value /= floatVal
```

### The clear command

The `clear` command resets the stored value to `0`. The code for `clearCmd` is short and simple:

```markup
// clearCmd represents the clear command
var clearCmd = &cobra.Command{
    Use: "clear",
    Short: "Clear result",
    Run: func(cmd *cobra.Command, args []string) {
        if len(args) > 0 {
            fmt.Println("command does not accept args")
            return
        }
        storage.SetValue(0)
        fmt.Println(0.0)
    },
}
```

We check whether any `args` are passed in, and if so, we print that the command does not accept any arguments and return. If the command is called `./calculator clear`, then the `0` value is stored and then printed back to the user.

## The Viper configuration

Let’s now discuss a simple way to use Viper configuration. In order to keep track of the value that has operations applied to it, we need to store this value. The easiest way to store data is in a file.

### The storage package

Within the repository, there’s a file, `storage/storage.go`, with the following code to set the value:

```markup
func SetValue(floatVal float64) error {
    f, err := os.OpenFile(viper.GetString("filename"),
       os.O_RDWR|os.O_CREATE|os.O_TRUNC, 0755)
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    defer f.Close()
    _, err = f.WriteString(fmt.Sprintf("%f", floatVal))
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    return nil
}
```

This code will write the data to the filename returned from `viper.GetString("filename")`. The code to get the value from the file is defined with the following code:

```markup
func GetValue() float64 {
    dat, err := os.ReadFile(viper.GetString("filename"))
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("unable to read from storage")
        return 0
    }
    floatVal, err := strconv.ParseFloat(string(dat), 64)
    if err != nil {
        return 0
    }
    return floatVal
}
```

Again, the same method is used to get the filename, to read, parse, and then return the data contained.

### Initializing the configuration

Inside the `main` function, we call the Viper methods to initialize our configuration right before we execute the command:

```markup
func main() {
    viper.AddConfigPath(".")
    viper.SetConfigName("config")
    viper.SetConfigType("json")
    err := viper.ReadInConfig()
    if err != nil {
        fmt.Println("error reading in config: ", err)
    }
    cmd.Execute()
}
```

Note

The `AddConfigPath` method is used to set the path for Viper to search for the configuration file. The `SetConfigName` method allows you to set the name of the configuration file, without the extension. The actual configuration file is `config.json`, but we pass in `config`. Finally, the `ReadInConfig` method reads in the configuration to make it available throughout the application.

### The configuration file

Finally, the configuration file, `config.json`, stores the value for the filename:

```markup
{
   "filename": "storage/result"
}
```

This file location can work for a UNIX- or Linux-based system. Change this to suit your platform and try the demo out for yourself!

## Running the basic calculator

To quickly build the basic calculator on UNIX or Linux, run `go build -o calculator main.go`. On Windows, run `go build -o` `calculator.exe main.go`.

I ran this application on my UNIX-based terminal and got the following output:

```markup
% ./calculator clear
0
% ./calculator add 123456789
123456789.000000
% ./calculator add 987654321
1111111110.000000
% ./calculator add 1
1111111111.000000
% ./calculator multiply 8
8888888888.000000
% ./calculator divide 222222222
40.000000
% ./calculator subtract 40
0.000000
```

Hopefully, this simple demo has provided you with a good understanding of how you can use the Cobra CLI to help speed up development and Viper for a simple way to configure your application.

Bookmark

# Summary

This chapter took you through the most popular library for building modern CLIs – Cobra – and its partner library for configuration – Viper. The Cobra package was explained in detail and the CLI’s usage with examples was also described. We went through examples to take you through generating your initial application code with the Cobra CLI, adding new commands and modifying the scaffolding, to autogenerate useful help and man pages. Viper, as a configuration tool that fits perfectly alongside Cobra, was also described, along with many of its options, in detail.

In the next chapter, we’ll discuss how to handle input to a CLI – whether it’s text in the form of commands, arguments, or flags, or the control characters that allow you to quit out of a terminal dashboard. We’ll also discuss different ways this input is processed and how to output results back to the user.

Bookmark

# Questions

1.  If you want to have a flag that is accessible to a command and all its subcommands, what kind of flag would be defined and how?
2.  What formatting options does Viper accept for configuration?

Bookmark

# Answers

1.  A global flag using the `PersistentFlag()` method when defining a flag on a command.
2.  JSON, TOML, YAML, HCL, INI, envfile, and Java properties formats.

Bookmark

# Further reading

-   _Cobra – A Framework for Modern CLI Apps in Go_ ([https://cobra.dev/](https://cobra.dev/)) provides extensive documentation for Cobra with examples utilizing Cobra and links to the Viper documentation