# Working with System Files

In the previous chapter, we talked about file input and output in Go, and created Go versions of the wc(1), dd(1), and cp(1) utilities.

While the main subject of this chapter is Unix system files and log files, you will also learn many other things, including pattern matching, file permissions, working with users and groups, and dealing with dates and times in Go. For all these subjects, you will see handy Go codes that will explain the presented techniques, and these can be used in your own Go programs without requiring too many changes.

So, this chapter will talk about the following topics:

-   Appending data to an existing file
-   Reading a file and altering each one of its lines
-   Regular expressions and pattern matching in Go
-   Sending information to Unix log files
-   Working with dates and times in Go
-   Working with Unix file permissions
-   Working with user IDs and group IDs
-   Learning more information about files and directories
-   Processing log files and extracting useful information from them
-   Generating difficult to guess passwords using random numbers

Bookmark

# Which files are considered system files?

Each Unix operation system contains files that are responsible for the configuration of the system as well as its various services. Most of these files are located in the /etc directory. I also like to consider log files as system files, although some people might disagree. Usually, most system log files can be found inside /var/log. However, the log files of the Apache and the nginx web server can be found elsewhere, depending on their configuration.

Bookmark

# Logging in Go

The log package provides a general way to log information on your Unix machine, whereas the log/syslog Go package allows you to send information to the system logging service using the logging level and the logging facility you want. Also, the time package can help you work with dates and times.

Bookmark

# Putting data at the end of a file

As discussed in [Chapter 6](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/6), _File Input and Output_, in this chapter, we will talk about opening a file for writing without destroying its existing data.

The Go program that will illustrate the technique, appendData.go, will accept two command-line arguments: the message you want to append and the name of the file that will store the text. This program will be presented in three parts.

The first part of appendData.go contains the following Go code:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
) 
```

As expected, the first part of the program contains the Go packages that will be used in the program.

The second part is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) != 3 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s message filename\n", filepath.Base(arguments[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
   message := arguments[1] 
   filename := arguments[2] 
 
   f, err := os.OpenFile(filename, 
os.O_RDWR|os.O_APPEND|os.O_CREATE, 0660) 
```

The desired task is done by the os.O\_APPEND flag of the os.OpenFile() function that tells Go to write at the end of the file. Additionally, the os.O\_CREATE flag will make os.OpenFile() to create the file if it does not exist, which is pretty handy because it saves you from having to write Go code that tests whether the file is already there or not.

The last part of the program is the following:

```markup
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
   defer f.Close() 
 
   fmt.Fprintf(f, "%s\n", message) 
} 
```

The fmt.Fprintf() function is used here in order to write the message to the file as plain text. As you can see, appendData.go is a relatively small Go program that does not contain any surprises.

Executing appendData.go will create no output, but it will do its job, as you can see from the output of the cat(1) utility before and after the execution of appendData.go:

```markup
$ cat test
[test]: test
: test
$ go run appendData.go test test
$ cat test
[test]: test
: test
test 
```

# Altering existing data

This section will teach you how to modify the contents of a file. The program that will be developed does a pretty convenient job: it adds a line number in front of each line of a text file. This means that you will need to read the input file line by line, keep a variable that will hold the line number value, and save it using the original name. Additionally, the initial value of the variable that holds the line number value can be defined when you start the program. The name of the Go program will be insertLineNumber.go, and it will be presented in four parts.

First, you will see the expected preamble:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "io/ioutil" 
   "os" 
   "strings" 
) 
```

The second part is mainly the configuration of the flag package:

```markup
func main() { 
   minusINIT := flag.Int("init", 1, "Initial Value") 
   flag.Parse() 
   flags := flag.Args() 
 
   if len(flags) == 0 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: insertLineNumber <files>\n") 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   lineNumber := *minusINIT   for _, filename := range flags { 
         fmt.Println("Processing:", filename) 
```

The lineNumber variable is initiated by the value of the minusINIT flag. Additionally, the utility can process multiple files using a for loop.

The third part of the program is the following:

```markup
         input, err := ioutil.ReadFile(filename) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               os.Exit(-1) 
         } 
 
         lines := strings.Split(string(input), "\n") 
```

As you can see, insertLineNumber.go reads its input file all at once using ioutil.ReadFile(), which might not be so efficient when processing huge text files. However, with today's computers, this should not be a problem. A better approach would be to read the input file line by line, write each altered line to a temporary file, and then replace the original file with the temporary one.

The last part of the utility is the following:

```markup
         for i, line := range lines { 
               lines[i] = fmt.Sprintf("%d: %s ", lineNumber, line) 
               lineNumber = lineNumber + 1
         } 
 
         lines[len(lines)-1] = "" 
         output := strings.Join(lines, "\n") 
         err = ioutil.WriteFile(filename, []byte(output), 0644) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               os.Exit(-1) 
         } 
   } 
   fmt.Println("Processed", lineNumber-*minusINIT, "lines!") 
}
```

As the range loop will introduce an extra line at the end of the file, you have to delete the last line in the lines slice using the lines\[len(lines)-1\] = "" statement, which means that the program assumes that all the files it processes end with a new line. If your text files do not do that, then you might want to change the code of insertLineNumber.go or add a new line at the end of your text files.

The running of insertLineNumber.go generates no visible output apart from the filename of each file it processes and the total number of processed lines. However, you can see the results of its execution by looking at the contents of the files you processed:

```markup
$ cat test
a
    
b
$ go run insertLineNumber.go -init=10 test
Processing: test
Processed 4 lines!
$ cat test
10: a
11:
12: b
```

If you try to process the same input file multiple times, as in the following example, an interesting thing will happen:

```markup
$ cat test
a
    
b
$ go run insertLineNumber.go -init=10 test test test
Processing: test
Processing: test
Processing: test
Processed 12 lines!
$ cat test
18: 14: 10: a
19: 15: 11:
20: 16: 12: b
```

Bookmark

# About log files

This part will teach you how to send information from a Go program to the logging service and therefore to system log files. Despite the obvious fact that it is good to keep information stored, log files are necessary for server processes because there is no other way for a server process to send information to the outside world, as it has no Terminal to send any output.

Log files are important and you should not underestimate the value of the information stored in them. Log files should be the first place to look for help when strange things start happening on a Unix machine.

Generally speaking, using a log file is better than displaying the output on the screen for two reasons: first, the output does not get lost, as it is stored on a file, and second, you can search and process log files using Unix tools, such as grep(1), awk(1), and sed(1), which cannot be done when messages are printed on a Terminal window.

# About logging

All Unix machines have a separate server process for logging log files. On macOS machines, the name of the process is syslogd(8). On the other hand, most Linux machines use rsyslogd(8), which is an improved and more reliable version of syslogd(8), which was the original Unix system utility for message logging.

However, despite the Unix variant you are using, or the name of the server process used for logging, logging works the same way on every Unix machine and therefore does not affect the Go code that you will write.

The best way to watch one or more log files is with the help of the tail(1) utility, followed by the \-f flag and the name of the log file you want to watch. The \-f flag tells tail(1) to wait for additional data. You will need to terminate such a tail(1) command by pressing _Ctrl_ + _C_.

# Logging facilities

A logging facility is like a category used for logging information. The value of the logging facility part can be any one of _auth_, _authpriv_, _cron_, _daemon_, _kern_, _lpr_, _mail_, _mark_, _news_, _syslog_, _user_, _UUCP_, _local0_, _local1_, _local2_, _local3_, _local4_, _local5_, _local6_, and _local7_; this is defined inside /etc/syslog.conf, /etc/rsyslog.conf, or another appropriate file depending on the server process used for system logging on your Unix machine. This means that if a logging facility is not defined and therefore handled, the log messages you send to it might get lost.

# Logging levels

A **logging level** or **priority** is a value that specifies the severity of the log entry. There exist various logging levels including _debug_, _info_, _notice_, _warning_, _err_, _crit_, _alert_, and _emerg,_ in reverse order of severity.

Look at the /etc/rsyslog.conf file of a Linux machine to learn more about how to control logging facilities and logging levels.

# The syslog Go package

This subsection will present a Go program that works on all Unix machines and sends data to the logging service in various ways. The name of the program is useSyslog.go, and it will be presented in four parts.

First, you will see the expected preamble:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "log" 
   "log/syslog" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
) 
```

You have to use the log package for logging and the log/syslog package for defining the logging facility and the logging level of your program.

The second part is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   programName := filepath.Base(os.Args[0]) 
   sysLog, e := syslog.New(syslog.LOG_INFO|syslog.LOG_LOCAL7, programName) 
   if e != nil { 
         log.Fatal(e) 
   } 
   sysLog.Crit("Crit: Logging in Go!") 
```

The syslog.New() function call, which returns a writer, tells your program where to direct all log messages. The good thing is that you already know how to use a writer!

Note that the developer should define both the priority and the facility that a program uses.

However, even with a defined priority and facility, the log/syslog package allows you to send direct log messages to other priorities using functions such as sysLog.Crit().

The third part of the program is the following:

```markup
   sysLog, e = syslog.New(syslog.LOG_ALERT|syslog.LOG_LOCAL7, "Some program!") 
   if e != nil { 
         log.Fatal(sysLog) 
   } 
sysLog.Emerg("Emerg: Logging in Go!") 
```

This part shows that you can call syslog.New() multiple times in the same program. Once again, calling the Emerg() function allows you to bypass what was defined by the syslog.New() function.

The last part is the following:

```markup
   fmt.Fprintf(sysLog, "log.Print: Logging in Go!") 
} 
```

This is the only call that uses the logging priority and the logging facility that were defined by syslog.New(), by directly writing to the sysLog writer.

Executing useLog.go will generate some output on the screen, but it will also write data to the appropriate log files. On a macOS Sierra or a Mac OS X machine, you will see the following:

```markup
$ go run useSyslog.go
    
Broadcast Message from _iconservices@iMac.local
        (no tty) at 18:01 EEST...
    
Emerg: Logging in Go!
$ grep "Logging in Go" /var/log/* 2>/dev/null
/var/log/system.log:May 19 18:01:31 iMac useSyslog[22608]: Crit: Logging in Go!
/var/log/system.log:May 19 18:01:31 iMac Some program![22608]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
/var/log/system.log:May 19 18:01:31 iMac Some program![22608]: log.Print: Logging in Go!
```

On a Debian Linux machine, you will see the following results:

```markup
$ go run useSyslog.go
    
Message from syslogd@mail at May 19 18:03:00 ...
Some program![1688]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
$
Broadcast message from systemd-journald@mail (Fri 2017-05-19 18:03:00 EEST):
    
useSyslog[1688]: Some program![1688]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
$ tail -5 /var/log/syslog
May 19 18:03:00 mail useSyslog[1688]: Crit: Logging in Go!
May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: log.Print: Logging in Go!
$ grep "Logging in Go" /var/log/* 2>/dev/null
/var/log/cisco.log:May 19 18:03:00 mail useSyslog[1688]: Crit: Logging in Go!
/var/log/cisco.log:May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
/var/log/cisco.log:May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: log.Print: Logging in Go!
/var/log/syslog:May 19 18:03:00 mail useSyslog[1688]: Crit: Logging in Go!
/var/log/syslog:May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: Emerg: Logging in Go!
/var/log/syslog:May 19 18:03:00 mail Some program![1688]: log.Print: Logging in Go!
```

The output from the two machines shows that the Linux machine has a different syslog configuration, which is the reason that the messages from useLog.go were also written to /var/log/cisco.log.

However, your main concern should not be whether the log messages will be written to too many files or not; rather if you will be able to find them or not!

# Processing log files

This subsection will process a log file that contains client IP addresses in order to create a summary of them. The name of the Go file will be countIP.go, and it will be presented in four parts. Note that countIP.go requires two parameters: the name of the log file and the field that contains the desired information. As countIP.go does not check whether the given field contains an IP address or not, it can also be used for other kinds of data if you remove some of its code.

First, you will see the expected preamble of the program:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "bufio" 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "io" 
   "net" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "strings" 
) 
```

The second part comes with the following Go code, which is the beginning of the implementation of the main() function:

```markup
func main() { 
   minusCOL := flag.Int("COL", 1, "Column") 
   flag.Parse() 
   flags := flag.Args() 
 
   if len(flags) == 0 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s <file1> [<file2> [... <fileN]]\n", filepath.Base(os.Args[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   column := *minusCOL 
   if column < 0 {
         fmt.Println("Invalid Column number!") 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
```

The countIP.go utility uses the flag package and can process multiple files.

The third part of the program is the following:

```markup
   myIPs := make(map[string]int) 
   for _, filename := range flags { 
         fmt.Println("\t\t", filename) 
         f, err := os.Open(filename) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Printf("error opening file %s\n", err) 
               continue 
         } 
         defer f.Close() 
 
         r := bufio.NewReader(f) 
         for { 
               line, err := r.ReadString('\n') 
 
               if err == io.EOF { 
                     break 
               } else if err != nil { 
                     fmt.Printf("error reading file %s", err) 
                     continue 
               } 
```

Each input file is read line by line, whereas the myIPs map variable is used for holding the count of each IP address.

The last part of countIP.go is as follows:

```markup
               data := strings.Fields(line) 
               ip := data[column-1] 
               trial := net.ParseIP(ip) 
               if trial.To4() == nil { 
                     continue 
               } 
 
               _, ok := myIPs[ip] 
               if ok { 
                     myIPs[ip] = myIPs[ip] + 1 
               } else { 
                     myIPs[ip] = 1 
               } 
         } 
   } 
 
   for key, _ := range myIPs { 
         fmt.Printf("%s %d\n", key, myIPs[key]) 
   } 
} 
```

Here is where the magic happens: first, you extract the desired field from the working line. Then, you use the net.ParseIP() function to make sure that you are dealing with a valid IP address: if you want the program to process other kinds of data, you should delete the Go code that uses the net.ParseIP() function. After that, you update the contents of the myIPs map based on whether the current IP address can be found in the map or not: you saw that code back in [Chapter 2](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/2)_, Writing Programs in Go_. Finally, you print the contents of the myIPs map on the screen, and you are done!

Executing countIP.go generates the following output:

```markup
$ go run countIP.go /tmp/log.1 /tmp/log.2
             /tmp/log.1
             /tmp/log.2
164.132.161.85 4
66.102.8.135 17
5.248.196.10 15
180.76.15.10 12
66.249.69.40 142
51.255.65.35 7
95.158.53.56 1
64.183.178.218 31
$ go run countIP.go /tmp/log.1 /tmp/log.2 | wc
    1297    2592   21266
```

However, it would be better if the output was sorted by the count associated with each IP address, which you can easily do with the help of the sort(1) Unix utility:

```markup
$ go run countIP.go /tmp/log.1 /tmp/log.2 | sort -rn -k2
45.55.38.245 979
159.203.126.63 976
130.193.51.27 698
5.9.63.149 370
77.121.238.13 340
46.4.116.197 308
51.254.103.60 302
51.255.194.31 277
195.74.244.47 201
61.14.225.57 179
69.30.198.242 152
66.249.69.40 142
2.86.9.124 140
2.86.27.46 127
66.249.69.18 125
```

If you want the first 10 IP addresses, you can filter the previous output with the head(1) utility as follows:

```markup
$ go run countIP.go /tmp/log.1 /tmp/log.2 | sort -rn -k2 | head
45.55.38.245 979
159.203.126.63 976
130.193.51.27 698
5.9.63.149 370
77.121.238.13 340
46.4.116.197 308
51.254.103.60 302
51.255.194.31 277
195.74.244.47 201
61.14.225.57 179
```

# File permissions revisited

There are times that we need to find detailed information about the Unix permissions of a file. The filePerm.go Go utility will teach you how to read the Unix file permissions of a file or a directory and print them as a binary number, a decimal number, and a string. The program will be presented in three parts. The first part is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
) 
```

The second part is as follows:

```markup
func tripletToBinary(triplet string) string { 
   if triplet == "rwx" { 
         return "111" 
   } 
   if triplet == "-wx" { 
         return "011" 
   } 
   if triplet == "--x" { 
         return "001" 
   } 
   if triplet == "---" { 
         return "000" 
   } 
   if triplet == "r-x" { 
         return "101" 
   } 
   if triplet == "r--" { 
         return "100" 
   } 
   if triplet == "--x" { 
         return "001" 
   } 
   if triplet == "rw-" { 
         return "110" 
   } 
   if triplet == "-w-" { 
         return "010" 
   } 
   return "unknown" 
} 
 
func convertToBinary(permissions string) string { 
   binaryPermissions := permissions[1:] 
   p1 := binaryPermissions[0:3] 
   p2 := binaryPermissions[3:6] 
   p3 := binaryPermissions[6:9] 
   return tripletToBinary(p1) + tripletToBinary(p2) + tripletToBinary(p3) 
} 
```

Here, you implement two functions that will help you convert a string with nine characters that hold the permissions of a file into a binary number. As an example, the rwxr-x--- string will be converted to 111101000. The initial string is extracted from the os.Stat() function call.

The last part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) == 1 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s filename\n", filepath.Base(arguments[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   filename := arguments[1] 
   info, _ := os.Stat(filename) 
   mode := info.Mode() 
 
   fmt.Println(filename, "mode is", mode) 
   fmt.Println("As string is", mode.String()[1:10]) 
   fmt.Println("As binary is", convertToBinary(mode.String())) 
} 
```

Executing filePerm.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run filePerm.go .
. mode is drwxr-xr-x
As string is rwxr-xr-x
As binary is 111101101
$ go run filePerm.go /tmp/swtag.log
/tmp/swtag.log mode is -rw-rw-rw-
As string is rw-rw-rw-
As binary is 110110110
```

# Changing file permissions

This section will explain how to change the Unix permissions of a file or a directory to the desired value; however, it will not deal with the sticky bit, the set user ID bit, or the set group ID bit: not because they are difficult to implement, but because you usually do not need any of these when dealing with system files.

The name of the utility will be setFilePerm.go, and it will be presented in four parts. The new file permissions will be given as a string with nine characters such as rwxrw-rw-.

The first part of setFilePerm.go contains the expected preamble Go code:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "strconv" 
) 
```

The second part is the implementation of the tripletToBinary() function that you saw in the previous section:

```markup
func tripletToBinary(triplet string) string { 
   if triplet == "rwx" { 
         return "111" 
   } 
   if triplet == "-wx" { 
         return "011" 
   } 
   if triplet == "--x" { 
         return "001" 
   } 
   if triplet == "---" { 
         return "000" 
   } 
   if triplet == "r-x" { 
         return "101" 
   } 
   if triplet == "r--" { 
         return "100" 
   } 
   if triplet == "--x" { 
         return "001" 
   } 
   if triplet == "rw-" { 
         return "110" 
   } 
   if triplet == "-w-" { 
         return "010" 
   } 
   return "unknown" 
} 
```

The third part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func convertToBinary(permissions string) string { 
   p1 := permissions[0:3] 
   p2 := permissions[3:6] 
   p3 := permissions[6:9] 
 
   p1 = tripletToBinary(p1) 
   p2 = tripletToBinary(p2) 
   p3 = tripletToBinary(p3) 
 
   p1Int, _ := strconv.ParseInt(p1, 2, 64) 
   p2Int, _ := strconv.ParseInt(p2, 2, 64) 
   p3Int, _ := strconv.ParseInt(p3, 2, 64) 
 
   returnValue := p1Int*100 + p2Int*10 + p3Int 
   tempReturnValue := int(returnValue) 
   returnString := "0" + strconv.Itoa(tempReturnValue) 
   return returnString 
} 
```

Here, the name of the function is misleading, as it does not return a binary number: this is my fault.

The last part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) != 3 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s filename permissions\n",  
filepath.Base(arguments[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   filename, _ := filepath.EvalSymlinks(arguments[1]) 
   permissions := arguments[2] 
   if len(permissions) != 9 { 
         fmt.Println("Permissions should be 9 characters  
(rwxrwxrwx):", permissions) 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
 
   bin := convertToBinary(permissions) 
   newPerms, _ := strconv.ParseUint(bin, 0, 32) 
   newMode := os.FileMode(newPerms) 
   os.Chmod(filename, newMode) 
} 
```

Here, you get the return value of convertToBinary() and convert it to an os.FileMode() variable in order to use it with the os.Chmod() function.

Running setFilePerm.go generates the following results:

```markup
$ go run setFilePerm.go /tmp/swtag.log rwxrwxrwx
$ ls -l /tmp/swtag.log
-rwxrwxrwx  1 mtsouk  wheel  7066 May 22 19:17 /tmp/swtag.log
$ go run setFilePerm.go /tmp/swtag.log rwxrwx---
$ ls -l /tmp/swtag.log
-rwxrwx---  1 mtsouk  wheel  7066 May 22 19:17 /tmp/swtag.log
```

# Finding other kinds of information about files

The most important information about a Unix file is its owner and its group, and this section will teach you how to find both of them using Go code. The findOG.go utility accepts a list of files as its command-line arguments and returns the owner and the group of each one of them. Its Go code will be presented in three parts.

The first part is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "syscall" 
) 
```

The second part is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) == 1 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s <files>\n", filepath.Base(arguments[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   for _, filename := range arguments[1:] { 
         fileInfo, err := os.Stat(filename) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               continue 
         } 
```

In this part, you make a call to the os.Stat() function to make sure that the file you want to process exists.

The last part of findOG.go comes with the following Go code:

```markup
         fmt.Printf("%+v\n", fileInfo.Sys()) 
         fmt.Println(fileInfo.Sys().(*syscall.Stat_t).Uid) 
         fmt.Println(fileInfo.Sys().(*syscall.Stat_t).Gid) 
   } 
} 
```

Yes, this is the most cryptic code you have seen so far in this book that uses the return value of os.Stat() to extract the desired information. Additionally, it is neither portable, which means that it might not work on your Unix variant, nor you can be sure that it will continue to work in forthcoming versions of Go!

Sometimes tasks that look easy might take you more time than expected. One of these tasks is the findOG.go program. This mainly happens because Go does not have an easy and portable way to find out the owner and the group of a file. Hopefully, this will change in the future.

Executing findOG.go on macOS Sierra or Mac OS X will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run findOG.go /tmp/swtag.log
&{Dev:16777218 Mode:33206 Nlink:1 Ino:50547755 Uid:501 Gid:0 Rdev:0 Pad_cgo_0:[0 0 0 0] Atimespec:{Sec:1495297106 Nsec:0} Mtimespec:{Sec:1495297106 Nsec:0} Ctimespec:{Sec:1495297106 Nsec:0} Birthtimespec:{Sec:1495044975 Nsec:0} Size:2586 Blocks:8 Blksize:4096 Flags:0 Gen:0 Lspare:0 Qspare:[0 0]}
501
0
$ ls -l /tmp/swtag.log
-rw-rw-rw-  1 mtsouk  wheel  2586 May 20 19:18 /tmp/swtag.log
$ grep wheel /etc/group
wheel:*:0:root 
```

Here, you can see that the fileInfo.Sys() call returns a plethora of information from the file in a somehow puzzling format: the information is analogous to the information from a C call to stat(2). The first line of output is the contents of the os.Stat.Sys() call, whereas the second line is the user ID (501) of the owner of the file and the third line is the group ID (0) of the owner of the file.

Executing findOG.go on a Debian Linux machine will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run findOG.go /home/mtsouk/connections.data
&{Dev:2048 Ino:1196167 Nlink:1 Mode:33188 Uid:1000 Gid:1000 X__pad0:0 Rdev:0 Size:9626800 Blksize:4096 Blocks:18840 Atim:{Sec:1412623801 Nsec:0} Mtim:{Sec:1495307521 Nsec:929812185} Ctim:{Sec:1495307521 Nsec:929812185} X__unused:[0 0 0]}
1000
1000
$ ls -l /home/mtsouk/connections.data
-rw-r--r-- 1 mtsouk mtsouk 9626800 May 20 22:12 /home/mtsouk/connections.data
code$ grep ^mtsouk /etc/group
mtsouk:x:1000:
```

The good news here is that findOG.go worked on both macOS Sierra and Debian Linux, even though macOS Sierra was using Go version 1.8.1 and Debian Linux was using Go version 1.3.3!

Most of the presented Go code will be used later in this chapter for the implementation of the userFiles.go utility.

Bookmark

# More pattern matching examples

This section will present regular expressions that match more difficult patterns than the ones you have seen so far in this book. Just remember that regular expressions and pattern matching are practical subjects that you should learn by experimenting and sometimes failing, not by reading about them.

If you are very careful with regular expressions in Go, you can easily read or change almost all the system files of a Unix system that are in plain text format. Just be extra careful when modifying system files!

# A simple pattern matching example

The example of this section will improve the functionality of the countIP.go utility, by developing a program that automatically detects the field with the IP address; therefore, it will not require the user to define the field of each log entry that contains the IP address. To make things simpler, the created program will only process the first IP address of each line: findIP.go takes a single command-line argument, which is the name of the log file you want to process. The program will be presented in four parts.

The first part of findIP.go is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "bufio" 
   "fmt" 
   "io" 
   "net" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "regexp" 
) 
```

The second part is where most of the magic happens with the help of a function:

```markup
func findIP(input string) string { 
   partIP := "(25[0-5]|2[0-4][0-9]|1[0-9][0-9]|[1-9]?[0-9])" 
   grammar := partIP + "\\." + partIP + "\\." + partIP + "\\." + partIP 
   matchMe := regexp.MustCompile(grammar) 
   return matchMe.FindString(input) 
} 
```

The regular expression is pretty complex considering that we just want to match four decimal numbers in the 0-255 range that are separated by dots, which mainly shows that regular expressions can be pretty complicated when you want to be methodical.

But let me explain this to you in more detail. An IP address has four parts separated by dots. Each one of these parts can have a value between 0 and 255, which means that number 257 is not an acceptable value: this is the main reason that the regular expression is so complex. The first case is for numbers between 250 and 255. The second case is for numbers between 200 and 249, and the third case is for numbers between 100 and 199. The last case is for catching values between 0 and 99.

The third part of findIP.go is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   if len(os.Args) != 2 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s logFile\n", filepath.Base(os.Args[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
   filename := os.Args[1] 
 
   f, err := os.Open(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Printf("error opening file %s\n", err) 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
   defer f.Close() 
 
   myIPs := make(map[string]int) 
   r := bufio.NewReader(f) 
   for { 
         line, err := r.ReadString('\n') 
         if err == io.EOF { 
               break 
         } else if err != nil { 
               fmt.Printf("error reading file %s", err) 
               break 
         } 
```

Here, you read the input log file line by line using bufio.NewReader().

The last part has the following Go code, which deals with processing the matches of the regular expression:

```markup
         ip := findIP(line) 
         trial := net.ParseIP(ip) 
         if trial.To4() == nil { 
               continue 
         } else { 
               _, ok := myIPs[ip] 
               if ok { 
                     myIPs[ip] = myIPs[ip] + 1 
               } else { 
                     myIPs[ip] = 1 
               } 
         } 
   } 
   for key, _ := range myIPs { 
         fmt.Printf("%s %d\n", key, myIPs[key]) 
   } 
} 
```

As you can see, findIP.go executes an additional checking on the IP that was found by the function that performed the pattern matching operation, using net.ParseIP(); this mainly happens because IP addresses are pretty tricky, and it is considered good practice to double check them! Additionally, this catches the case where findIP() returns nothing because a valid IP was not found in the processed line. The last thing the program does before exiting is to print the contents of the myIPs map.

Consider how many incredible and useful utilities you can develop with a small amount of Go code: it is really amazing!

Executing findIP.go on a Linux machine in order to process the /var/log/auth.log log file will create the following output:

```markup
$ wc /var/log/auth.log
  1499647  20313719 155224677 /var/log/auth.log
$ go run findIP.go /var/log/auth.log
39.114.101.107 1003
111.224.233.41 10
189.41.147.179 306
55.31.112.181 1
5.141.131.102 10
171.60.251.143 30
218.237.65.48 1
24.16.210.120 8
199.115.116.50 3
139.160.113.181 1
```

You can sort the previous output by the number of times an IP was found and display the 10 most popular IP addresses, as shown here:

```markup
$ go run findIP.go /var/log/auth.log | sort -nr -k2 | head
218.65.30.156 102533
61.177.172.27 37746
218.65.30.43 34640
109.74.11.18 32870
61.177.172.55 31968
218.65.30.124 31649
59.63.188.3 30970
61.177.172.28 30023
116.31.116.30 29314
61.177.172.14 28615
```

So, in this case, the findIP.go utility is used for checking the security of your Linux machine!

# An advanced example of pattern matching

In this section, you will learn how to swap the values of two fields of each line of a text file, provided they are in the correct format. This mainly happens in log files or other text files where you want to scan a line for certain types of data, and if the data is found, you might need to do something with them: in this case, you will change the place of the two values.

The name of the program will be swapRE.go, and it will be presented in four parts. Once again, the program will read a text file line by line and try to match the desired strings before swapping them. The utility will print the contents of the new file on the screen; it is the responsibility of the user to save the results to a new file. The format of the log entries that swapRE.go expects to process are similar to the following:

```markup
127.0.0.1 - - [24/May/2017:06:41:11 +0300] "GET /contact HTTP/1.1" 200 6048 "http://www.mtsoukalos.eu/" "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.3; WOW64; Trident/7.0; rv:11.0) like Gecko" 132953
```

The entries from the previous line that the program will swap are \[24/May/2017:06:41:11 +0300\] and 132953, which are the date and time and the time it took the browser to get the desired information, respectively; the program expects to find this at the end of each line. However, the regular expression also checks that the date and time are in the correct format and that the last field of each log entry is indeed a number.

As you will see, using regular expressions in Go, can be perplexing sometimes, mainly because regular expressions are relatively difficult to build, in general.

The first part of swapRE.go will be the expected preamble:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "bufio" 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "io" 
   "os" 
   "regexp" 
) 
```

The second part comes with the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   flag.Parse() 
   if flag.NArg() != 1 { 
         fmt.Println("Please provide one log file to process!") 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
   numberOfLines := 0 
   numberOfLinesMatched := 0 
 
   filename := flag.Arg(0) 
   f, err := os.Open(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Printf("error opening file %s", err) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
   defer f.Close() 
```

There is nothing particularly interesting or new here.

The third part is the following:

```markup
   r := bufio.NewReader(f) 
   for { 
         line, err := r.ReadString('\n') 
         if err == io.EOF { 
               break 
         } else if err != nil { 
               fmt.Printf("error reading file %s", err) 
         } 
```

Here is the Go code that allows you to process the input file line by line.

The last part of swapRE.go is the following:

```markup
         numberOfLines++ 
         r := regexp.MustCompile(`(.*) (\[\d\d\/(\w+)/\d\d\d\d:\d\d:\d\d:\d\d(.*)\]) (.*) (\d+)`) 
         if r.MatchString(line) { 
               numberOfLinesMatched++ 
               match := r.FindStringSubmatch(line) 
               fmt.Println(match[1], match[6], match[5], match[2]) 
         } 
   } 
   fmt.Println("Line processed:", numberOfLines) 
   fmt.Println("Line matched:", numberOfLinesMatched) 
} 
```

As you can imagine, complex regular expressions, such as the one presented here, are built step by step, not all at once. Even in that case, you may still fail many times in the process because even the tiniest mistake in a complex regular expression will cause it to not do what you expect: extensive testing is the key here!

The parentheses used inside a regular expression allow you to reference each match afterwards and are very handy when you want to process what you have matched. What you want here is to find a \[ character, then two digits that will be the day of the month, then a word, which will be the name of the month, and then four digits that will be the year. Next, you match anything else until you find a \] character. Then you match all the digits at the end of each line.

Note that there might exist alternative ways to write the same regular expression. The general advice here is to write it in a way that is clear and that you can understand.

Executing swapRE.gowith, a small test log file will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run swapRE.go /tmp/log.log
127.0.0.1 - - 28787 "GET /taxonomy/term/35/feed HTTP/1.1" 200 2360 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; Baiduspider/2.0; +http://www.baidu.com/search/spider.html)" [24/May/2017:07:04:48 +0300]
- - 32145 HTTP/1.1" 200 2616 "http://www.mtsoukalos.eu/" "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; inoreader.com-like FeedFetcher-Google)" [24/May/2017:07:09:24 +0300]
Line processed: 3
Line matched: 2
```

# Renaming multiple files using regular expressions

The last section on pattern matching and regular expressions will work on filenames and will allow you to rename multiple files. As you can guess, a walk function will be used in the program while a regular expression will match the filenames you want to rename.

When dealing with files, you should be extra careful because you might accidentally destroy things! Putting it simply, do not test such utilities on a production server.

The name of the utility will be multipleMV.go, and it will be presented in three parts. What multipleMV.go will do is insert a string in front of every filename that is a match to the given regular expression.

The first part is the expected preamble:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "regexp" 
) 
var RE stringvar renameString string 
```

The two global variables save you from having to use many parameters in your functions. Additionally, as the signature of the walk() function, presented in a while, cannot change, it will not be possible to pass them as parameters to walk(). So, in this case, having two global parameters makes things easier and simpler.

The second part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func walk(path string, f os.FileInfo, err error) error { 
   regex, err := regexp.Compile(RE) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Printf("Error in RE: %s\n", RE) 
         return err 
   } 
 
   if path == "." { 
         return nil 
   } 
   nameOfFile := filepath.Base(path) 
   if regex.MatchString(nameOfFile) { 
         newName := filepath.Dir(path) + "/" + renameString + "_" + nameOfFile 
         os.Rename(path, newName) 
   } 
   return nil 
} 
```

All the functionality of the program is embedded in the walk() function. After a successful match, the new filename is stored in the newName variable before executing the os.Rename() function.

The last part of multipleMV.go is the implementation of the main() function:

```markup
func main() { 
   flag.Parse() 
   if flag.NArg() != 3 { 
         fmt.Printf("Usage: %s REGEXP RENAME Path", filepath.Base(os.Args[0])) 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
 
   RE = flag.Arg(0) 
   renameString = flag.Arg(1) 
   Path := flag.Arg(2) 
   Path, _ = filepath.EvalSymlinks(Path) 
   filepath.Walk(Path, walk) 
} 
```

Here, there is nothing you have not seen before: the only interesting thing is the call to filepath.EvalSymlinks() in order to not have to deal with symbolic links.

Using multipleMV.go is as simple as running the following commands:

```markup
$ ls -l /tmp/swtag.log
-rw-rw-rw-  1 mtsouk  wheel  446 May 22 09:18 /tmp/swtag.log
$ go run multipleMV.go 'log$' new /tmp
$ ls -l /tmp/new_swtag.log
-rw-rw-rw-  1 mtsouk  wheel  446 May 22 09:18 /tmp/new_swtag.log
$ go run multipleMV.go 'log$' new /tmp
$ ls -l /tmp/new_new_swtag.log
-rw-rw-rw-  1 mtsouk  wheel  446 May 22 09:18 /tmp/new_new_swtag.log
$ go run multipleMV.go 'log$' new /tmp
$ ls -l /tmp/new_new_new_swtag.log
-rw-rw-rw-  1 mtsouk  wheel  446 May 22 09:18 /tmp/new_new_new_swtag.log 
```

Bookmark

# Searching files revisited

This section will teach you how to find files using criteria such as user ID, group ID, and file permissions. Although this section could have been included in [](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/5)[Chapter 5](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/5), _Files and Directories_, I decided to put it here, because there are times when you will want to use this kind of information in order to inform a system administrator that there is something wrong with the system.

# Finding the user ID of a user

This subsection will present a program that shows the user ID of a user, given their username, which is more or less the output of the id -u utility:

```markup
$ id -u
33
$ id -u root
0
```

The fact that there exists a Go package named user, which can be found under the os package that can help you implement the desired task, should not come as surprise to you. The name of the program will be userID.go, and it will be presented in two parts. If you give no command-line arguments to userID.go, it will print the user ID of the current user; otherwise, it will print the user ID of the given username.

The first part of userID.go is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "os/user" 
) 
 
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) == 1 { 
         uid := os.Getuid() 
         fmt.Println(uid) 
         return 
   } 
```

The os.Getuid() function returns the user ID of the current user.

The second part of userID.go comes with the following Go code:

```markup
   username := arguments[1] 
   u, err := user.Lookup(username) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
         return 
   } 
   fmt.Println(u.Uid) 
}
```

Given a username, the user.Lookup() function returns a user.User compound value. We will only use the Uid field of that compound value to find the user ID of the given username.

Executing userID.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run userID.go
501
$ go run userID.go root
0
$ go run userID.go doesNotExist
user: unknown user doesNotExist
```

# Finding all the groups a user belongs to

Each user can belong to more than one group: this section will show how to find out the list of groups a user belongs to, given their username.

The name of the utility will be listGroups.go, and it will be presented in four parts. The first part of listGroups.go is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "os/user" 
) 
```

The second part has the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   var u *user.User 
   var err error 
   if len(arguments) == 1 { 
         u, err = user.Current() 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               return 
         } 
```

The approach that listGroups.go takes when there are no command-line arguments is similar to the one found in userID.go. However, there is a big difference, as this time you do not need the user ID of the current user, but the username of the current user; so you call user.Current(), which returns a user.User value.

The third part contains the following Go code:

```markup
   } else { 
         username := arguments[1] 
         u, err = user.Lookup(username) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               return 
         } 
   } 
```

So, if a command-line argument is given to the program, it is handled by the previous code with the help of the user.Lookup() function that also returns a user.User value.

The last part contains the following Go code:

```markup
   gids, _ := u.GroupIds() 
   for _, gid := range gids { 
         group, err := user.LookupGroupId(gid) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               continue 
         } 
         fmt.Printf("%s(%s) ", group.Gid, group.Name) 
   } 
   fmt.Println() 
} 
```

Here, you get the list of the group IDs that the user: signified by the u variable: is a member of, by calling the u.GroupIds() function. Then, you will need a for loop to iterate over all the list elements and print them. It should be made clear that this list is stored in u; that is, a user.User value.

Executing listGroups.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run listGroups.go
    20(staff) 701(com.apple.sharepoint.group.1) 12(everyone) 61(localaccounts) 79(_appserverusr) 80(admin) 81(_appserveradm) 98(_lpadmin) 33(_appstore) 100(_lpoperator) 204(_developer) 395(com.apple.access_ftp) 398(com.apple.access_screensharing) 399(com.apple.access_ssh)
$ go run listGroups.go www
70(_www) 12(everyone) 61(localaccounts) 701(com.apple.sharepoint.group.1) 100(_lpoperator)
```

The output of listGroups.go is much more enriched than the output of both the id -G -n and groups commands:

```markup
$ id -G -n
staff com.apple.sharepoint.group.1 everyone localaccounts _appserverusr admin _appserveradm _lpadmin _appstore _lpoperator _developer com.apple.access_ftp com.apple.access_screensharing com.apple.access_ssh
$ groups
staff com.apple.sharepoint.group.1 everyone localaccounts _appserverusr admin _appserveradm _lpadmin _appstore _lpoperator _developer com.apple.access_ftp com.apple.access_screensharing com.apple.access_ssh
```

# Finding files that belong or do not belong to a given user

This subsection will create a Go program that scans a directory tree and presents files that belong or do not belong to a given user. The name of the program will be userFiles.go. In its default mode of operation, userFiles.go will display all files that belong to a given username; when used with the \-no flag, it will only display the files that do not belong to the given username.

The code of userFiles.go will be presented in four parts.

The first one is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "os/user" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "strconv" 
   "syscall" 
) 
var uid int32 = 0
var INCLUDE bool = true 
```

The reason for declaring INCLUDE and uid as global variables is that you want both of them to be accessible from every point of the program. Additionally, as the signature of walkFunction() cannot change: only its name can change: using global variables makes things easier for the developer.

The second part comes with the following Go code:

```markup
func userOfFIle(filename string) int32 { 
   fileInfo, err := os.Stat(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
         return 1000000 
   } 
   UID := fileInfo.Sys().(*syscall.Stat_t).Uid 
   return int32(UID) 
} 
```

The use of a local variable named UID might be a poor choice, given that there is a global variable named uid! A better name for the global variable would have been gUID. Note that for an explanation of the way that the call that returns the UID variable works, you should search for the interfaces and type conversions in Go, because talking about it is beyond the scope of this book.

The third part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func walkFunction(path string, info os.FileInfo, err error) error { 
   _, err = os.Lstat(path) 
   if err != nil { 
         return err 
   } 
 
   if userOfFIle(path) == uid && INCLUDE { 
         fmt.Println(path) 
   } else if userOfFIle(path) != uid && !(INCLUDE) { 
         fmt.Println(path) 
   } 
 
   return err 
} 
```

Here you can see the implementation of a walk function that will access every file and directory in a given directory tree, in order to print the desired filenames only.

The last part of the utility contains the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   minusNO := flag.Bool("no", true, "Include") 
   minusPATH := flag.String("path", ".", "Path to Search") 
   flag.Parse() 
   flags := flag.Args() 
 
   INCLUDE = *minusNO 
   Path := *minusPATH 
 
   if len(flags) == 0 { 
         uid = int32(os.Getuid()) 
   } else { 
         u, err := user.Lookup(flags[0]) 
         if err != nil { 
               fmt.Println(err) 
               os.Exit(1) 
         } 
         temp, err := strconv.ParseInt(u.Uid, 10, 32) 
         uid = int32(temp) 
   } 
 
   err := filepath.Walk(Path, walkFunction) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
   } 
} 
```

Here you deal with the configuration of the flag package before calling the filepath.Walk() function.

Executing userFiles.go generates the following output:

```markup
$ go run userFiles.go -path=/tmp www-data
/tmp/.htaccess
/tmp/update-cache-2a113cac
/tmp/update-extraction-2a113cac
```

If you do not give any command-line arguments or flags, the userFiles.go utility will assume that you want to search the current directory for files that belong to the current user:

```markup
$ go run userFiles.go
.
appendData.go
countIP.go
```

So, in order to find all the files in the /srv/www/www.highiso.net directory that do not belong to the www-data user, you should execute the following command:

```markup
$ go run userFiles.go -no=false -path=/srv/www/www.highiso.net www-data
/srv/www/www.highiso.net/list.files
/srv/www/www.highiso.net/public_html/wp-content/.htaccess
/srv/www/www.highiso.net/public_html.UnderCon/.htaccess
```

# Finding files based on their permissions

Now that you know how to find the Unix permissions of a file, you can improve the regExpFind.go utility from the previous chapter in order to support searching based on file permissions; however, in order to avoid presenting a really big Go program here without any practical reason, the presented program will be autonomous and only support finding files based on their permissions. The name of the new utility will be findPerm.go, and it will be presented in four parts. The permissions will be given in the command line as a string using the format returned by the ls(1) command (rwxr-xr--).

The first part of the utility is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
) 
var PERMISSIONS string
```

The PERMISSIONS variable is made global in order to be accessible from anywhere in the program, and because the signature of walkFunction() cannot change.

The second part of findPerm.go contains the following code:

```markup
func permissionsOfFIle(filename string) string { 
   info, err := os.Stat(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         return "-1" 
   } 
   mode := info.Mode() 
   return mode.String()[1:10] 
} 
```

The third part is the implementation of walkFunction():

```markup
func walkFunction(path string, info os.FileInfo, err error) error { 
   _, err = os.Lstat(path) 
   if err != nil { 
         return err 
   } 
 
   if permissionsOfFIle(path) == PERMISSIONS { 
         fmt.Println(path) 
   } 
   return err 
} 
```

The last part of findPerm.go is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   arguments := os.Args 
   if len(arguments) != 3 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s RootDirectory permissions\n",  
filepath.Base(arguments[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   Path := arguments[1] 
   Path, _ = filepath.EvalSymlinks(Path) 
   PERMISSIONS = arguments[2] 
 
   err := filepath.Walk(Path, walkFunction) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
   } 
} 
```

Executing findPerm.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run findPerm.go /tmp rw-------
/private/tmp/.adobeLockFile
$ ls -l /private/tmp/.adobeLockFile
-rw-------  1 mtsouk  wheel  0 May 19 14:36 /private/tmp/.adobeLockFile
```

Bookmark

# Date and time operations

This section will show you how to work with dates and times in Go. This task might look insignificant, but it can be very important when you want to synchronize things such as log entries and error messages. We will start by illustrating some of the functionality of the time package.

# Playing with dates and times

This section will present a small Go program named dateTime.go that shows how to work with times and dates in Go. The code of dateTime.go will be presented in three parts. The first part is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "time" 
) 
 
func main() { 
 
   fmt.Println("Epoch time:", time.Now().Unix()) 
   t := time.Now() 
   fmt.Println(t, t.Format(time.RFC3339)) 
   fmt.Println(t.Weekday(), t.Day(), t.Month(), t.Year()) 
   time.Sleep(time.Second) 
   t1 := time.Now() 
   fmt.Println("Time difference:", t1.Sub(t)) 
 
   formatT := t.Format("01 January 2006") 
   fmt.Println(formatT) 
   loc, _ := time.LoadLocation("Europe/London") 
   londonTime := t.In(loc) 
   fmt.Println("London:", londonTime) 
```

In this part, you can see how you can change a date from one format to another, and also, how to find the date and time in a different time zone. The time.Now() function used at the beginning of the main() function returns the current time.

The second part is the following:

```markup
   myDate := "23 May 2017" 
   d, _ := time.Parse("02 January 2006", myDate) 
   fmt.Println(d) 
 
   myDate1 := "23 May 2016" 
   d1, _ := time.Parse("02 February 2006", myDate1) 
   fmt.Println(d1)
```

The list of constants that can be used for creating your own parse format can be found at [https://golang.org/src/time/format.go](https://golang.org/src/time/format.go). Go does not define the format of a date or a time in a form like DDYYYYMM or %D %Y %M as the rest of the programming languages do, but uses its own approach.

Here, you see how you can read a string and try to convert it to a valid date, both successfully (d) and unsuccessfully (d1). The problem with the d1 variable is the use of February in the format string: you should have used January instead.

The last part of dateTime.go comes with the following Go code:

```markup
   myDT := "Tuesday 23 May 2017 at 23:36" 
   dt, _ := time.Parse("Monday 02 January 2006 at 15:04", myDT) 
   fmt.Println(dt) 
} 
```

This part also shows how to convert a string into a date and a time, provided that it is in the expected format.

Executing dateTime.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run dateTime.go
Epoch time: 1495572122
2017-05-23 23:42:02.459713551 +0300 EEST 2017-05-23T23:42:02+03:00
Tuesday 23 May 2017
Time difference: 1.001749054s
05 May 2017
London: 2017-05-23 21:42:02.459713551 +0100 BST
2017-05-23 00:00:00 +0000 UTC
0001-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 UTC
2017-05-23 23:36:00 +0000 UTC
```

# Reformatting the times in a log file

This section will show how to implement a program that reads a log file that contains date and time information, in order to convert the time format found in each log entry. This operation might be needed when you have log files from different servers that are in several time zones, and you want to synchronize their times in order to create reports from their data or store them into a database to process them some other time.

The name of the presented program will be dateTimeLog.go, and it will be presented in four parts.

The first part is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "bufio" 
   "flag" 
   "fmt" 
   "io" 
   "os" 
   "regexp" 
   "strings" 
   "time" 
) 
```

The second part contains the following Go code:

```markup
func main() { 
   flag.Parse() 
   if flag.NArg() != 1 { 
         fmt.Println("Please provide one log file to process!") 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
 
   filename := flag.Arg(0) 
   f, err := os.Open(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Printf("error opening file %s", err) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
   defer f.Close() 
```

Here, you just configure the flag package and open the input file for reading.

The third part of the program is the following:

```markup
   r := bufio.NewReader(f) 
   for { 
         line, err := r.ReadString('\n') 
         if err == io.EOF { 
               break 
         } else if err != nil { 
               fmt.Printf("error reading file %s", err) 
         } 
```

Here you read the input file line by line.

The last part is the following:

```markup
         r := regexp.MustCompile(`.*\[(\d\d\/\w+/\d\d\d\d:\d\d:\d\d:\d\d.*)\] .*`) 
         if r.MatchString(line) { 
               match := r.FindStringSubmatch(line) 
               d1, err := time.Parse("02/Jan/2006:15:04:05 -0700", match[1]) 
               if err != nil { 
                     fmt.Println(err) 
               } 
               newFormat := d1.Format(time.RFC3339) 
               fmt.Print(strings.Replace(line, match[1], newFormat, 1)) 
         } 
   } 
} 
```

The general idea here is that once you have a match, you parse the date and time you found using time.Parse() and then convert it to the desired format using the time.Format() function. Also, you replace the initial match with the output of the time.Format() function before you print it using strings.Replace().

Executing dateTimeLog.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run dateTimeLog.go /tmp/log.log
127.0.0.1 - - [2017-05-24T07:04:48+03:00] "GET /taxonomy/term/35/feed HTTP/1.1" 200 2360 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; Baiduspider/2.0; +http://www.baidu.com/search/spider.html)" 28787
- - [2017-05-24T07:09:24+03:00] HTTP/1.1" 200 2616 "http://www.mtsoukalos.eu/" "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; inoreader.com-like FeedFetcher-Google)" 32145
[2017-05-24T07:38:08+03:00] "GET /tweets?page=181 HTTP/1.1" 200 8605 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (compatible; Baiduspider/2.0; +http://www.baidu.com/search/spider.html)" 100531
```

Bookmark

# Rotating log files

Log files tend to get bigger and bigger all the time because data is written to them all the time; it would be good to have a technique for rotating them. This section will present such a technique. The name of the Go program will be rotateLog.go, and it will be presented in three parts. Note that for a process to rotate a log file, the process must be the one that opened that log file for writing. Trying to rotate a log that you do not own might create problems on your Unix machine, and should be avoided!

What you will also see here is another technique where you use your own log file for storing your log entries, with the help of log.SetOutput(): after a successful call to log.SetOutput(), each function call to log.Print() will make the output go to the log file used as the parameter of log.SetOutput().

The first part of rotateLog.go is the following:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "fmt" 
   "log" 
   "os" 
   "strconv" 
   "time" 
) 
 
var TOTALWRITES int = 0 
var ENTRIESPERLOGFILE int = 100 
var WHENTOSTOP int = 230 
var openLogFile os.File 
```

Using hard coded variables that define when the program will stop is considered good practice: this happens because you do not have any other way to tell rotateLog.go to stop. However, if you use the functionality of the rotateLog.go utility in a compiled program, then such variables should be given as command-line arguments, because you should not have to recompile the program in order to change the way the program behaves!

The second part of rotateLog.go is the following:

```markup
func rotateLogFile(filename string) error { 
   openLogFile.Close() 
   os.Rename(filename, filename+"."+strconv.Itoa(TOTALWRITES)) 
   err := setUpLogFile(filename) 
   return err 
} 
 
func setUpLogFile(filename string) error { 
   openLogFile, err := os.OpenFile(filename, os.O_RDWR|os.O_CREATE|os.O_APPEND, 0644) 
   if err != nil { 
         return err 
   } 
   log.SetOutput(openLogFile) 
   return nil 
} 
```

Here, you define the Go function named rotateLogFile() for rotating the desired log file, which is the most important part of the program. The setUpLogFile() function helps you restart the log file after you rotate it. What is also illustrated here is the use of log.SetOutput() to tell the program where to write the log entries. Note that you should open your log file using os.OpenFile(), because os.Open() will not work for log.SetOutput(), and os.Open() does open files for writing!

The last part is the following:

```markup
func main() { 
   numberOfLogEntries := 0 
   filename := "/tmp/myLog.log" 
   err := setUpLogFile(filename) 
   if err != nil { 
         fmt.Println(err) 
         os.Exit(-1) 
   } 
 
   for { 
         log.Println(numberOfLogEntries, "This is a test log entry") 
         numberOfLogEntries++ 
         TOTALWRITES++ 
         if numberOfLogEntries > ENTRIESPERLOGFILE { 
               rotateLogFile(filename)               numberOfLogEntries = 0 
         } 
         if TOTALWRITES > WHENTOSTOP { 
               rotateLogFile(filename)               break 
         } 
         time.Sleep(time.Second) 
   } 
   fmt.Println("Wrote", TOTALWRITES, "log entries!") 
} 
```

In this part, the main() function keeps writing data to a log file while counting the number of entries that have been written so far. When the defined number of entries have been reached (ENTRIESPERLOGFILE), the main() function will call the rotateLogFile() function, which will do the dirty work for us. On a real program, you will most likely not need to call time.Sleep() to delay the execution of the program. For this particular program, time.Sleep() will give you time to examine your log file using tail -f, should you choose to do so.

Running rotateLog.go will generate the following output on the screen and inside the /tmp directory:

```markup
$ go run rotateLog.go
Wrote 231 log entries!
$ wc /tmp/myLog.log*
   0       0       0 /tmp/myLog.log
 101     909    4839 /tmp/myLog.log.101
 101     909    4839 /tmp/myLog.log.202
  29     261    1382 /tmp/myLog.log.231
 231    2079   11060 total
```

[Chapter 8](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/8),_Processes and Signals_, will present a much better approach on log rotating that will be based on Unix signals.

Bookmark

# Creating good random passwords

This section will illustrate how to create good random passwords in Go, in order to protect the security of your Unix machines. The main reason for including it here instead of another chapter is because the presented Go program will use the /dev/random device, which is a file defined by your Unix system, for getting the seed of the random number generator.  
The name of the Go program will be goodPass.go, and it will require just one optional parameter, which will be the length of the generated password: the default size of the generated password will be 10 characters. Additionally, the program will generate ASCII characters starting from ! up to z. The ASCII code of the exclamation mark is 33, whereas the ASCII code of small z is 122.

The first part of goodPass.go is the required preamble:

```markup
package main 
 
import ( 
   "encoding/binary" 
   "fmt" 
   "math/rand" 
   "os" 
   "path/filepath" 
   "strconv" 
) 
```

The second part of the program is as follows:

```markup
var MAX int = 90 
var MIN int = 0 
var seedSize int = 10 
 
func random(min, max int) int { 
   return rand.Intn(max-min) + min 
} 
```

You have already seen the random() function back in _[](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/2)_[Chapter 2](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781787125643/2)_,_ _Writing Programs in Go_, so there is nothing particularly interesting here.

The third part of goodPass.go is where the implementation of the main() function begins:

```markup
func main() { 
   if len(os.Args) != 2 { 
         fmt.Printf("usage: %s length\n", filepath.Base(os.Args[0])) 
         os.Exit(1) 
   } 
 
   LENGTH, _ := strconv.ParseInt(os.Args[1], 10, 64) 
   f, _ := os.Open("/dev/random") 
   var seed int64 
   binary.Read(f, binary.LittleEndian, &seed) 
   rand.Seed(seed) 
   f.Close() 
   fmt.Println("Seed:", seed) 
```

Here, apart from reading the command-line argument, you also open the /dev/random device for reading, which happens by calling the binary.Read() function and storing what you read in the seed variable. The reason for using binary.Read() is that you need to specify the byte order used (binary.LittleEndian) and that you need to build an int64 instead of a series of bytes. This is an example of having to read from a binary file into Go types.

The last part of the program contains the following Go code:

```markup
   startChar := "!" 
   var i int64 
   for i = 0; i < LENGTH; i++ { 
         anInt := int(random(MIN, MAX)) 
         newChar := string(startChar[0] + byte(anInt)) 
         if newChar == " " { 
               i = i - i 
               continue 
         } 
         fmt.Print(newChar) 
   } 
   fmt.Println() 
} 
```

As you can see, Go has a strange way of dealing with ASCII characters because Go supports Unicode characters by default. However, you can still convert an integer number into an ASCII character as can be seen in the way you define the newChar variable.

Executing goodPass.go will generate the following output:

```markup
$ go run goodPass.go 1
Seed: -5195038511418503382
b
$ go run goodPass.go 10
Seed: 8492864627151568776
k43Ve`+YD)
$ go run goodPass.go 50
Seed: -4276736612056007162
!=Gy+;XV>6eviuR=ST\u:Mk4Q875Y4YZiZhq&q_4Ih/]''`2:x
```

Bookmark

# Another Go update

As I was writing this chapter, Go got updated. The following output shows the related information:

```markup
$ date
Wed May 24 13:35:36 EEST 2017
$ go version
go version go1.8.2 darwin/amd64 
```

Bookmark

# Exercises

1.  Find and read the documentation of the time package.
2.  Try to change the Go code of userFiles.go in order to support multiple users.
3.  Change the Go code of insertLineNumber.go in order to read the input file line by line, write each line to a temporary file, and then, replace the original file with the temporary one. If you do not know how and where to create a temporary file, you can use a random number generator to get a temporary filename and the /tmp directory to temporarily save it.
4.  Make the necessary changes to multipleMV.go in order to print the files that are a match to the given regular expression without actually renaming them.
5.  Try to create a regular expression that matches PNG files and use it to process the contents of a log file.
6.  Create a regular expression that catches a date and a time string in order to print just the date part and delete the time part.

Bookmark

# Summary

In this chapter, we talked about many things, including working with log files, dealing with Unix file permissions, users, and groups, creating regular expressions, and processing text files.

In the next chapter, we will talk about Unix signals, which allow you to communicate with a running program from the outside world, in an asynchronous way. Furthermore, we will tell you how to plot in Go.

f