# Functional Programming Libraries

In the previous chapters of this book, we looked at how we can leverage functional programming techniques in Go. In doing so, we have looked over how functions can be created, such as Filter, Map, Reduce, and so on. We also looked at data structures such as the monad and its application with the Maybe data type, which could represent a value that’s either present or absent without having to rely on nil.

As mentioned previously, these are common tools in a functional programmer’s toolbox. As such, there are open source libraries that have this functionality built in. As generics are a recent addition in Go (about 1 year ago at the time of writing), not all libraries currently leverage generics to implement these concepts. For that reason, this chapter will cover both libraries that work in all versions of Go, as well as libraries that will exclusively work in versions that support Generics.

In this chapter, we will cover the following topics:

-   Pre-generics libraries for creating common FP functions
-   Post-generics libraries for creating common FP functions

Bookmark

# Technical requirements

For this chapter, any version of Go will suffice for implementing the pre-generics library code. Once we move to the post-generics libraries, a version of 1.18 or higher will be needed to support the code. All the code can be found on GitHub at [https://github.com/ImagineDevOps DevOps/Functional-Programming-in-Go./tree/main/Chapter11](https://github.com/ImagineDevOps DevOps/Functional-Programming-in-Go./tree/main/Chapter11).

There are a few things to call out before we dive deeper into this topic that relate somewhat to the technical requirements.

## Is the library alive – and do the examples still match it?

When writing a book about a specific programming language, it is hard to write it in an evergreen fashion. But programming libraries are perhaps even harder to keep evergreen than any other content. There are two reasons for this, which are important to acknowledge:

-   The implementations can change, and versioning is not always respected.
-   The library may become unsupported in the future.

The first problem, _changing implementations_, should be somewhat mitigated by the fact that only popular libraries will be explored in this chapter, whereby popularity is judged by engagement on GitHub as well as stars on GitHub. It’s an imperfect measure, but it’s better than not having anything to go by.

I hope that these libraries respect versioning and that they limit breaking changes as much as possible. Still, I can’t guarantee that these libraries won’t change and that the functions will work as-is when you are reading this chapter. In the code example, I will highlight which version of the library is being shown so that the results can at least be recreated by fetching the correct version of the library, even if that is not the latest version. This brings us to the second, _related_ problem.

The library may become unsupported. If you are working with an older version of the library to recreate the examples in this chapter because the latest version introduced some breaking changes, then clearly there’s a risk that you’ll run into some known issues, and you might not get support as you’re using an older version. But, even if the examples shown here work correctly with the latest version of the library, the library can still be stale. If everything works as intended and the library is considered feature complete, that’s not immediately a red flag.

However, it does mean that finding these libraries can be hard. The best way to determine this is by looking for any activity on the GitHub (or GitLab) page. For example, is the most recent commit only a few days or weeks ago, or is it years in the past? Are the contributors actively responding to tickets or do they all go unanswered? Are they engaging with their community over Discord or IRC? These are all examples that can hint at how well maintained a library is.

## Legal requirements

I’ll keep this part brief, as I am not a lawyer. But anyone dealing with open source code should be aware that not all open source code is permissive.

Note

Before working with a library, especially in a commercial context, be sure to review the software license and confirm that your use case is legally allowed and under which conditions. (For example, some licenses will allow the use of the code with attribution. Others will only allow for non-commercial use cases and so on.)

Bookmark

# Pre-generics libraries for creating common FP functions

With or without generics, it is common to operate on collection-style data structures in any programming language. Storing a series of values, whether it is a list of numbers representing scores on a test or a collection of structs such as all employees working in a hospital, is common enough that you’ll run into these data structures sooner rather than later. The operations that are performed on these can also fall into a few categories, especially once we abstract them into higher-order functions. You either have to modify the data elements in some way (for example, multiplying all the values by two) or modify the container in some way (for example, removing all the odd numbers). As we have seen, rather than implementing a function such as `removeOdds` or `multiplyNumbers`, what we’d like to write is just a function that can filter any element based on a predicate or change an element based on a transformation (these are the Filter and Map functions, respectively).

Before generics were introduced, there was no clear and best way to handle this. The reasoning for not abstracting these use cases, at the time, was that writing functions specific to your data structure would deliver the best results in terms of performance. So, you’d give up a bit of developer comfort but would get a more performant application in return. In hindsight, many of the operations on collections have an identical implementation, which means there’s no real performance difference. It’s only a natural consequence that people came up with ways of building abstractions for repeating implementations.

Broadly speaking, there are two ways this problem could be tackled before the introduction of generics – either by programming against the empty interface (`interface{}`), an interface that any data type implicitly adheres to in Go, or through code generation. The former, programming against `interface{}`, has too many disadvantages in terms of typesafety and runtimesafety to advocate strongly for it. But the latter, code generation, is still interesting to look at, if only because code generation could still be useful in a post-generics world albeit for different use cases.

Libraries versus custom implementations

In this book, we have seen ways to create our own set of functions that follow the functional programming paradigm. Libraries might offer a more efficient implementation and can prevent you from reinventing the wheel. However, if you want to keep your dependency graph lightweight, it is much easier to do so by providing a few implementations yourself now that Go has: generics. In a pre-generics version of Go, this was much harder and I’d favor the library-based approach. Neither the empty interface-based approach nor the code generation approach is easy to implement without errors and headaches.

## Code generation libraries for pre-generics Go

Code generation, as the name implies, is a technique for generating Go code that can then be used like regular Go code in our application. The Go toolchain has all the necessary tools to do this out of the box. In Go, it is possible to add comments to your code that the compiler will interpret as commands. Such comments make it possible to trigger a special operation during the compile time of your program. These comments are called **pragma**. For example, you can add a comment to a function that will tell the compiler to avoid in-lining this function (the compiler can ignore it, so it’s more a suggestion than a command):

```markup
//go:noinline
func someFunc() {}
```

The idea behind the code generation library, which we will explore shortly, is that using these special comments can trigger the generation of functions for a specific type, which implements the common functional programming operations such as filtering, mapping, reducing, and so on. The first library that we will explore, Pie, works in exactly this way.

### A slice of Pie

The library that we will explore is **Pie**, written by Elliot Chance and available on GitHub here: [https://github.com/elliotchance/pie/tree/master/v1](https://github.com/elliotchance/pie/tree/master/v1). This library is available in two versions:

-   Version 1 focuses on Go at or below 1.17
-   Version 2 is the newer version for working with generics and needs Go 1.18 or above to work

In version 1, there are two ways of using this library. You can either use the functions directly to operate on common data types (`[]string`, `[]float64`, or `[]int`), or you can use this library to generate functions for your own data type. First, we’ll explore the built-in structures and then move on to generating functions for custom types.

#### Using the built-in functions of Pie

Pie supports built-in functions for three data types:

-   `[]``string`
-   `[]``float64`
-   `[]``int`

These are quite common, so it makes sense that these are supported by default. In the examples throughout this book, we have shown how we can filter a slice of integers to retain only the even numbers. Then, we squared them by using the Map function. Doing this in Pie is easy and follows the same idea as the code that we implemented in [_Chapter 6_](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781801811163/2B18771_06.xhtml#_idTextAnchor101) and beyond. As we are doing this through the use of a library, let’s first take a look at the content of the `go.mod` file to highlight which version of Pie we are using:

```markup
go 1.17
require github.com/elliotchance/pie v1.39.0
```

Note

This is showing `go 1.17` as we are explicitly looking at libraries that can be used before generics were introduced.

Now that we have imported the library (after running `go get`), we can use it in our application. Let’s build the Filter and Map example, as explained earlier:

```markup
package main
import (
        "fmt"
        "github.com/elliotchance/pie/pie"
)
func main() {
        out := pie.Ints{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}.
                Filter(func(i int) bool {
                        return i%2 == 0
                }).
                Map(func(i int) int { return i * i })
        fmt.Printf("result: %v\n", out)
}
```

Running this code will output `result: [4 16 36 64 100]`, as expected. Pie allows us to build and chain functions together, similar to what we have seen in this book so far. Out of the box, this only works for slices of strings, ints, and float64s. Each of these requires a custom implementation in the library. By attaching the function to a concrete type, it can support multiple Filter and Map functions defined for distinct data types. This is also something that we have looked at doing ourselves, and as pointed out, this is a time-consuming and repetitive undertaking.

What Pie does is remove some of this repetitive work by using code generation to generate the implementation for each data type. The details of how code generation works in this library are beyond the scope of this book, but I’d encourage checking out the library itself on GitHub and diving into the code to get a better appreciation for how this was built as it is genuinely quite interesting.

Pie ships with a lot of functions. To get an up-to-date listing with a description of each, take a look at the wiki at [https://github.com/elliotchance/pie/tree/master/v1](https://github.com/elliotchance/pie/tree/master/v1).

#### Pie for custom data types

If we want to use Pie for our own data type, we need to generate the code to do this:

1.  First, let’s set up a struct that we can use in all the following examples. We’ll create a struct to represent a dog, and also a type alias for a slice of the `[]``Dog` type:
    
    ```markup
    //go:generate pie Dogs.*
    ```
    
    ```markup
    type Dogs []Dog
    ```
    
    ```markup
    type Dog struct {
    ```
    
    ```markup
        Name string
    ```
    
    ```markup
        Age  int
    ```
    
    ```markup
    }
    ```
    
2.  With this set up, we can run the `go generate` command and generate all of Pie’s functions for our custom data type. This created a new file, `dogs_pie.go`, in the same directory as our type definitions. By looking through the generated file, we can see which functions were generated. For example, the `Reverse` function was generated specifically for the `Dog` data type. This is copied verbatim here:
    
    ```markup
    // Reverse returns a new copy of the slice with the
    ```
    
    ```markup
      elements ordered in reverse.
    ```
    
    ```markup
    // This is useful when combined with Sort to get a
    ```
    
    ```markup
      descending sort order:
    ```
    
    ```markup
    //
    ```
    
    ```markup
    //   ss.Sort().Reverse()
    ```
    
    ```markup
    //
    ```
    
    ```markup
    func (ss Dogs) Reverse() Dogs {
    ```
    
    ```markup
     // Avoid the allocation. If there is one element or
    ```
    
    ```markup
        less it is already
    ```
    
    ```markup
     // reversed.
    ```
    
    ```markup
     if len(ss) < 2 {
    ```
    
    ```markup
               return ss
    ```
    
    ```markup
     }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     sorted := make([]Dog, len(ss))
    ```
    
    ```markup
     for i := 0; i < len(ss); i++ {
    ```
    
    ```markup
        sorted[i] = ss[len(ss)-i-1]
    ```
    
    ```markup
     }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     return sorted
    ```
    
    ```markup
    }
    ```
    
3.  We can also find the Filter and Map functions defined for the `Dog` data type. Again, these have been copied verbatim but with the comments omitted:
    
    ```markup
    func (ss Dogs) Filter(condition func(Dog) bool) (ss2
    ```
    
    ```markup
        Dogs) {
    ```
    
    ```markup
     for _, s := range ss {
    ```
    
    ```markup
        if condition(s) {
    ```
    
    ```markup
     ss2 = append(ss2, s)
    ```
    
    ```markup
          }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     return
    ```
    
    ```markup
    }
    ```
    
    ```markup
    func (ss Dogs) Map(fn func(Dog) Dog) (ss2 Dogs) {
    ```
    
    ```markup
     if ss == nil {
    ```
    
    ```markup
        return nil
    ```
    
    ```markup
     }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     ss2 = make([]Dog, len(ss))
    ```
    
    ```markup
     for i, s := range ss {
    ```
    
    ```markup
        ss2[i] = fn(s)
    ```
    
    ```markup
     }
    ```
    
    ```markup
     return
    ```
    
    ```markup
    }
    ```
    

What this approach should highlight is that if you have many distinct types for which you are generating these functions, you are polluting your code base quite a bit with similar but not quite identical code. The executables that you are building will be larger as a result of this, and while it’s not often something that you have to think about anymore, if you are targeting a platform with limited memory availability, this might be a showstopper.

That said, let’s take a look at how we can use the generated functions with another example in the `main` function. First, we’ll create some dogs, each with a name and an age. Then, we will filter the dogs for those that are older than 10. These results will then get sorted based on age, and this will be printed as the result:

```markup
func main() {
        MyDogs := []pkg.Dog{
                pkg.Dog{
                        "Bucky",
                        1,
                },
                pkg.Dog{
                        "Keeno",
                        15,
                },
                pkg.Dog{
                        "Tala",
                        16,
                },
                pkg.Dog{
                        "Amigo",
                        7,
                },
        }
        results := pkg.Dogs(MyDogs).
                Filter(func(d pkg.Dog) bool {
                        return d.Age > 10
                }).SortUsing(func(a, b pkg.Dog) bool {
                return a.Age < b.Age
        })
        fmt.Printf("results: %v\n", results)
}
```

Given this input, we get the following output:

```markup
results: [{Keeno 15} {Tala 16}]
```

There are more functions to explore in Pie for a pre-generics version of Go. But let’s shift our focus now to contemporary Go code and look at libraries that we can leverage since Go 1.18.

go generate and go environment

To run `go generate` with Pie or any other executable that you download through `go get`, you need to ensure that your environment setup has been configured correctly to discover such executables. In a \*nix-based system, this means that `go/bin` needs to be added to the `$PATH` variable. On Windows, you need to add `go/bin` to the environment variables. In the worst case, you can either download the GitHub source code or look for the directory where go dependencies are downloaded and build them yourself through `go install` and then move the executable to an environment location that is registered for your system.

Pie and Hasgo

For the sake of being transparent, there is another library out there that follows a similar approach to Pie but tailors the functions to a Haskell-like implementation. This library is called **Hasgo** ([https://github.com/DylanMeeus/hasgo](https://github.com/DylanMeeus/hasgo)), of which I am the author. While both libraries work similarly, Pie offers more functions out of the box and fully supports Go 1.18. But if you have written Haskell before, Hasgo might feel more familiar in terms of function naming and documentation.

Bookmark

# Post-generics functional programming libraries

Functional programming libraries have seen a rise in popularity since the advent of generics in Go. No longer is it necessary to mess with the empty interface or to rely on code generation to build out the staples that make up functional programming languages. We’ll explore a few libraries in this section and see how their implementation compares. In doing so, we will stick with examples that are more or less identical but might show off some different functions from the ones we have seen so far in this book.

## Pie with generics

The first library that we will look at is Pie. In the previous section, we indicated that there are two versions of Pie available today: v1, which is tailored to Go before the introduction of generics, and v2, which offers the same functionality in terms of functions but leverages generics to do so. v2 is actively maintained, so I expect that over time v1 and v2 will no longer offer feature parity. That said, the Go community is pretty good at adopting the latest Go version wherever possible, so I don’t expect this to be a blocker for anyone.

Before we dive into the code, this is a snippet of the `go.mod` file, just to highlight which version of Pie we are using:

```markup
go 1.18
require github.com/elliotchance/pie/v2 v2.3.0
```

The `go 1.18` statement indicates that we can use generics, as generics were introduced in this version. Any version above 1.18 will work for the examples that we are about to see.

As with the pre-generics example, we will work with the `Dog` struct and a slice of the `[]Dog` type. Unlike the previous non-generics example, we don’t need to add the compiler pragma to generate any code, nor do we need the type alias for `[]Dog` (although using this can still be good practice in a real application):

```markup
type Dog struct {
        Name string
        Age  int
}
```

In the `main` function, we will create a slice of dogs. Then, we will once again filter for the dogs that are older than 10. We will then map their name to uppercase and finally return the result sorted by age:

```markup
import "github.com/elliotchance/pie/v2"
func main() {
        MyDogs := []Dog{
                Dog{
                        "Bucky",
                        1,
                },
                Dog{
                        "Keeno",
                        15,
                },
                Dog{
                        "Tala",
                        16,
                },
                Dog{
                        "Amigo",
                        7,
                },
        }
        result := pie.Of(MyDogs).
                Filter(func(d Dog) bool {
                        return d.Age > 10
                }).Map(func(d Dog) Dog {
                d.Name = strings.ToUpper(d.Name)
                return d
        }).
                SortUsing(func(a, b Dog) bool {
                        return a.Age < b.Age
                })
        fmt.Printf("out: %v\n", result)
}
```

As you can tell, the code is pretty similar to the pre-generics version. However, no code generation was used to achieve this. Also, note that `pie.Of()` figured out what type of data we are operating on. In the pre-generics version, this is part of the reason why we had to create a type alias for `[]Dog` – so that the code generator could then use Filter, Map, Reduce, or some other method for the correct slice type and attach it for dot notation-style function chaining. With generics, we no longer need to do so. In general, Pie is a good library to explore if you want to introduce generics to a team, as the familiar dot notation-style chaining of function calls looks natural to developers who are used to an object-oriented approach. As mentioned previously, it has an extensive set of functions that can be used out of the box. Next, let’s look at a library for functional programming that is based on **Lodash**.

## Lodash, for Go

**lo** ([https://github.com/samber/lo](https://github.com/samber/lo)) is a library that, similar to Pie, adds easy-to-use functions to Go and is quite popular at the moment. It is inspired by the insanely popular Lodash library for JavaScript ([https://github.com/lodash/lodash](https://github.com/lodash/lodash)), which currently has over 55,000 stars on GitHub and is widely used.

Currently, lo supports 38 functions that operate on slices, 16 of which operate on the Map data type, and a bunch of convenience functions for searching, tuples, channels, and (set) intersection-style operations. It’s not practical to outline all the functions here, but if you have a problem that requires operating on these common container data types, it’s a good idea to check whether this library suits your needs before reinventing the wheel. What we will do in this section is take a look at a similar example to the one we used for Pie.

### An example implementation with lo

As we are importing a new library, the following snippet shows the library and version that we will use for these examples:

```markup
go 1.18
require (
        github.com/samber/lo v1.37.0
)
```

To demonstrate this library, we’ll once again use a `main` function and a slice of dogs. In this case, we’ll want to do the following. First, we’ll deduplicate the slice so that each element in the slice is unique. Then, we will transform the names of all dogs into uppercase variants. This is the result that we will print:

```markup
func main() {
        result :=
                lo.Map(lo.Uniq(MyDogs), func(d Dog, i int)
                    Dog {
                        d.Name = strings.ToUpper(d.Name)
                        return d
                })
        fmt.Printf("%v\n", result)
}
```

In this small example, you can see how the use of the library is more reminiscent of a style chosen by (pure) functional programming languages rather than the dot notation style common to object-oriented code. We are chaining function calls by passing them as the input parameters of the higher-order function. Note that these are not lazily evaluated. In the preceding example, first, the `Uniq` function runs, which removes the duplicate entries from our input slice. Then, the `Map` function runs and applies the transformation. Remember that we are mutating the **copy** of the `Dog` struct by calling `d.Name = ...`, but this does not mutate the original data element. We explored this in more detail in previous chapters of this book.

There is one additional feature that bears calling out. `lo` contains a subset of the library supported for concurrent function calls. There is a package in `lo` under `lo/parallel` that supports the parallel evaluation of function calls. Let’s rewrite our example but have the `Map` function work concurrently. (**Also, note that this package is called parallel but is talking about** **concurrent code**).

First, here’s the import statement and import alias:

```markup
        lop "github.com/samber/lo/parallel"
```

Next, here’s the code to run the `Map` function concurrently, with the `Uniq` function still running sequentially:

```markup
        result :=
                lop.Map(lo.Uniq(MyDogs), func(d Dog, i int)
                    Dog {
                        d.Name = strings.ToUpper(d.Name)
                        return d
                })
        fmt.Printf("%v\n", result)
```

This took almost no refactoring from our side but leveraged goroutines for concurrency. Pretty neat!

To close this chapter, let’s look at a library by the same author of `lo` that contains monad-like data structures such as the `Maybe` data type, which we explored in [_Chapter 5_](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781801811163/2B18771_05.xhtml#_idTextAnchor085).

## Mo, for go

Mo is a library that adds support for monad-like data structures in Go and is relatively popular. It fully supports Go 1.18+, and thus is built around generics. You can find the package itself here: [https://github.com/samber/mo](https://github.com/samber/mo).

It’s worth taking the time to explore this library and read the documentation, especially as this could have changed by the time you read this book. In essence, it works in the same way as the `Maybe` implementation in [_Chapter 5_](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781801811163/2B18771_05.xhtml#_idTextAnchor085) although, in this library, that type is called `Option`. We can create a data type that optionally contains a value, but can also represent the absence of a value. This data type then supports functions to transform the data or get the data in a nil-safe way. For example, let’s create an option that contains a dog:

```markup
func main() {
        maybe := mo.Some(Dog{"Bucky", 1})
        getOrElse := maybe.OrElse(Dog{})
        fmt.Println(getOrElse)
}
```

This prints the following:

```markup
{Bucky 1}
```

Now, if we were to use this to represent a `nil` value, we could still access it in a type-safe way. The `OrElse` function will ensure that a backup is used as a result of the function call, which is the default value provided by the caller. For example, let’s say we add the following code to our `main` function:

```markup
        maybe2 := mo.None[Dog]()
        getOrElse2 := maybe2.OrElse(Dog{"Default", -1})
        fmt.Println(getOrElse2)
```

The output would look like this:

```markup
{Default -1}
```

This library supports other types as well, such as `Future` and `Task`. But one particularly useful one is the `Result` type, which is more or less like the `Maybe` type but is meant to work in cases where a value can optionally contain an error. We’ll demonstrate this in the following snippet. First, we will call the `Ok()` function, which creates the `Result` type with a valid `Dog` object. In the second case, we will create the `Result` type with an error instead of a `Dog` object. In both cases, we will try to get and print the result, as well as the error message:

```markup
        ok := mo.Ok(MyDogs[0])
        result1 := ok.OrElse(Dog{})
        err1 := ok.Error()
        fmt.Println(result1, err1)
        err := errors.New("dog not found")
        ok2 := mo.Err[Dog](err)
        result2 := ok2.OrElse(Dog{"Default", -1})
        err2 := ok2.Error()
        fmt.Println(result2, err2)
```

If we run this function, we will get the following output:

```markup
{Bucky 1} <nil>
{Default -1} dog not found
```

This shows us that based on the content of the `error` value for `Result`, the behavior of the type is different. In the first instance, where we don’t have an error, we get back the correct dog and the error is empty. In the second instance, we get back the default value that we provided as part of the `OrElse` statement, as well as the underlying error message.

Bookmark

# Summary

In this chapter, we looked at libraries that implement concepts of the functional programming paradigm. We started by looking at Pie, a library that can help users in building code in the functional paradigm whether working with a code base that uses Go before or after the introduction of generics in Go 1.18. Specifically for the pre-generics version, we looked at the approach of code generation for custom types to get generics-like behavior. Pie allowed us to showcase the ease with which we can create functions such as Map and Filter since the introduction of generics.

Then, looked at the Lodash-inspired Go library, `lo`. This library supports common functions that operate on container data types such as slices and maps, but unlike Pie, it follows a nested approach to function chaining rather than the dot notation syntax. `lo` does offer concurrent implementations for certain functions, so if performance is a concern and concurrency seems like the right solution, checking out this library is a good idea.

Finally, we looked at the `mo` library, which adds monad-like data structures to Go. Specifically, we looked at the `Option` data structure, which is comparable to the `Maybe` data structure that we created in [_Chapter 5_](https://subscription.imaginedevops.io/book/programming/9781801811163/2B18771_05.xhtml#_idTextAnchor085). `mo` also offers a `Result` type, which is built for error handling and allows us to program more safely when dealing with potential `error` values.